the cloud.
Huzzah.
All right. Thank you, Kate. Appreciate
it.
All right, all sorry about all of that.
Uh, a little technical difficulties.
I'm still admitting people, by the way.
So, I'm going to give it a minute even
though we're late. I'm sorry, but I'm
going to give it one more minute. Um, as
I admit people
because we had a little snafu here.
Um, just FYI, as as board members know,
you know, Liz is on a cruise. She can't
make it, but also Jeff Magcguire texted
to say he's traveling and has flight
delays and cannot make it.
So,
>> just one of those nights. it is. And
because of that, I I think I stupidly
didn't think to myself that I had to
sort out all the credentiing
um thinking Jeff would be here. You
know,
>> my fault. So, we'll we'll sort it.
>> In any event, I think it looks like
we've got people admitted. Hopefully,
that's everybody.
We're recording. So, I'm going to say at
7:17 p.m. our special board meeting on
March 4th, 2026, we'll begin. We'll
start with the pledge of allegiance.
Pledge allegiance to the flag states of
America
>> and to the republic stands,
>> one nation,
>> one nation under God,
>> indivisible,
with liberty and justice for all.
>> So, as you know, our meeting uh is very
simple. We're going to do a round of
public speak and then we will get to our
presentations. Uh we're going to go
Wall-E first and Val second. So, okay.
So, let's look here. Um let me just go
through this. I'm going to go through
the people for public speak just based
on what I see on my screen here with
participants. So, I'm going to start
with Jerry Cr.
>> Hi everyone. It's good to be here. Thank
you for keeping with the meeting and
even though it didn't fly right for you
to start with, thank you, Robert.
Appreciate it. I'd like to be here just
to listen and I want to support the
board of education buck uh budget and
I also since Molly is here, I assume
he's here for the fire department,
>> correct? And I I also support what the
firemen need, the fire department, and
uh
I trust these people who have put
together the budgets and hope that you
will support them.
>> Thank you, Jerry. And you got anything
while you're here?
>> I'm just here listening to see what's
been going on.
>> Okay, fair enough. Um,
Anna, I'm not going to take the chance
of trying to pronounce your last name
because I know I'll screw it up.
>> You might be you might be muted. Um,
>> yeah, for those who want to speak. Oh,
there you go.
>> There we go. It was taking a while to
load. Hello. I'm um some of you may know
me, some of you may not. I'm a new
resident in town. Um I've been living
here uh oh gosh, is it almost two years
now? Um I think it will be. Um almost
two years. And um I'm just here to
listen, I guess. Um see what's going on
with the school. I have two little ones.
I I did have some questions
um on the proposed school budget. So, I
don't know if um I should ask now or
just general questions or if I should
ask um after the superintendent speaks
perhaps. I just don't know what would be
best.
>> The difficulty is our our our agenda
only has public speak at the front end.
Normally, our meetings have it before
and after. So, I would suggest if you
could encapsulate them as quickly as you
can to throw them out there now and
hopefully um Valerie could take notes
and uh respond to them.
>> Sure. I I guess I had a question about
um the school psychologist.
I don't know
>> what's being recommended.
And then um yes,
>> that's listed as a salary for for
90,460.
Um and then later on in the actual
budget previously um I think it says it
was listed as psychological services um
at like 45 and 46 in 2025 and 2026
adopted. So, I'm just looking for an
explanation on that on what those
entails compared to what it is for 90
and where the numbers are coming from.
Um,
and then we had a question actually
about superintendent actual salary and
cont.
>> Can we mute people?
>> Sorry, not you. Cool.
Um, I just had a general question about
just the superintendent salary um and
contract and increases and I guess when
that was approved or went before um a
public vote. I just um so there was
that. I you know there's an increase it
looks like in a public librarian for the
school by like 35,000.
Just basically explanations as to why
certain things are increasing. Um, okay.
>> I guess I could go line by line, but
it's just in order for me to go line by
line, it would take me a long time.
>> It would take too long. But I think
we're going to get some of that from
Val. And then um
>> you know, at the end of the meeting, I
may I may see if I may check in again,
but right now I think we get the gist
and uh
>> I'm just open to hearing. Yeah.
>> Okay. Um Okay. So, we have some uh some
other folks. Um, Caitlyn, you're here,
the chair of the board of ed. Do you
have commentary at this point?
>> Hi. Can you guys hear me? Okay.
>> Yep.
>> Okay. Um, so a couple comments back to
what you mentioned, Anna. Um, I don't
know if you've been able to listen to
the board of ed budget meetings, um,
that are recorded. Um, but answers to a
lot of your questions are explained in
that and have gone over in detail at our
budget meetings that were prior to this.
Um, I'm here to support the school board
budget. Um, and also to support our
superintendent. Um, also wanted the
board of finance to be aware. Um, I know
you guys have had discussions about, you
know, how how do we get more money for
our town and and potentially looking at
increasing tuition costs for people that
pay tuition. Um, I think that it's a
slippery slope and you as a board
probably need to think about how you
approach and look at ECS dollars and how
they are applied. Um, in the past they
have been applied to the town budget so
that the town budget comes out $2
million
less. Um, and I think potentially maybe
as a town you guys need to look at um,
applying those on a per student level
uh, to both RAM and AES. Um, but that's
obviously not my purview. So just
throwing that out there. Thank you.
>> Okay. Um, okay. So, let's go on.
>> May I follow up quickly? I'm sorry. I
just know Caitlyn asked just I'm happy
to go listen to those board of ed
meetings. If I do have follow-up
questions, do I direct them to the board
of ed to the board of finance? Who do I
direct them to specifically?
>> I would go boards and the board of ed
and the superintendent.
>> Yeah. And and the other thing to mention
and this is this is a very simple thing
but people may not know this fully the
board of eds meetings are when you want
to look at them on YouTube or what have
you. They're on the andover the AES
website.
>> Yeah. The schools.
>> Yeah. No, it's not always clear. So on
the town side, you'll have our meetings
and the board selectman.
>> Yeah.
>> And if you want to look at a board of ed
meeting, you got to go to the town uh
school website, which bizarrely, as
somebody who has been involved in this
so long as I have, I messed up one
night. So, just FYI. Um, okay. Um, no
worries, Joanne.
>> Here to listen. Thank you.
>> Cool. All right. Let's see. Linda.
>> All set. Just here to listen.
>> Okay. Uh, we have our town treasurer,
Lisa. I mean, I I I'll open it up to
you, but I think you're here to to to
help us out more than to speak, but go
ahead
Lisa.
>> Okay,
>> I was muted. Sorry. I just didn't know
if you are
>> I don't have any questions right now. I
am here to listen, but I did get a call
from the library, so there's a little
bit of a change. just to let everybody
know that called and there's a little
bit of a library change. I think it goes
back to that the process of putting the
grant before the be the before the horse
and the cart before the horse kind of
thing. But I guess you guys have to tell
me where you want that grant money to
come out of because there's two line
items and I don't know which one to take
it out of what they want. So,
>> okay, we may get to that. We'll see.
>> Yeah, that's fine. I just wanted to let
you know they called concerned and and
so you know just to let you know there's
a little bit
>> we got to get the library right. We we
have we have um messed that up before
and I don't want that to happen again
for sure.
>> Yep.
>> Uh Ron
>> nothing to comment on.
>> Okay. Thank you sir. Uh Sharon.
>> Hi just here in support of the AES
budget and our superintendent. Thanks.
>> Thanks, neighbor. All right. Um, and
then we have Valen Wallally, who we'll
be hearing from shortly. So, I'm gonna
skip you guys because you're going to be
talking to us at length. I If anyone
here want you know that I missed, I've
gone through the the list here, but if
you want to raise your hands if I missed
you, go ahead. Otherwise, I'm going to
move on with the meeting.
5 4 3 2 1.
Okay.
Mr. Wall-E, let's talk about the fire
department.
>> Well, let's call it the fire commission
budget.
>> Fair enough.
>> Okay.
>> Uh, our increase this year is very
small. It's 1.5%.
We've basically moved some money within
the budget. You did get the breakdown of
the budget that I sent through to Kate.
So you don't just have the bottom line
figure.
>> Yeah, I I got a bunch of emails today,
so bear with me. But yes, I believe we
do have it.
>> Okay. Uh I'll get down with the changes
basically and then if you have any
questions specific to any of the line
items, I can address those. We reduced
the vehicle maintenance line item since
we have a truck that's less than 5 years
old and one that's brand new. So, we
figure our maintenance costs are going
to be down this year. And we moved that
money,
the 5,000 basically to office supplies.
And that is because
our reporting system, the national fire
incident reporting system, Eners, is
gone. And there's a new system that has
taken over and that is for reporting all
fire responses and handling all the EMS
reports for all the ambulance calls. And
that has significantly increased. The
fire department, I believe, through the
ambulance billing fund is paying for
half of that and we're going to have to
pay for the other half of this new
program to be installed, all the
software that comes with it. And it's a
lot more expensive than what we were
paying for the regular NFERS.
And the other item that we increased was
training. We've got some new young
people that are very enthusiastic and
they're willing to take the state
sponsored courses and these courses are
not free. The other part of this is that
we've taken advantage of the Eastern
Connecticut Fireman's Training School to
work with other departments and share
the cost of a day or a night at the
training center for training. And those
are basically the changes from last
year's budget.
Um, we think electricity, we're good.
Propane, we're good. The cost of gas and
diesel, we don't see a need for an
increase. Building maintenance, uh,
staying the same. Equipment maintenance,
that's the portable equipment testing,
and that's basically host testing,
extinguisher testing, Scott bottle
testing, air testing,
uh communications
that involves
what we have to pay for Talon and other
things,
protective clothing. Basically, right
now we're in good shape with turnout
gear, but we're replacing pieces and
parts. Somebody's boots have a problem,
we replace them, a coat, gloves, helmet,
coat, but not a full set. So, we're good
with that figure.
Um, firefighting, office supplies, I
explained the increase there.
firefighting supplies. Basically, most
of that is for hose that either fails
annual testing or has reached its
10-year life limit. Hazmat stays the
same. The hazmat equipment we get 550.
We increase training cost recovery,
which has not changed in probably five
years. And then fireman's physicals
again remaining at $6,000.
So, at this point, any questions anyone
has, I'm glad to answer. And if I can't,
that's why Ronnie Mike is on the line as
well.
>> Okay. So, I have two questions. Well,
one is that I was going back through my
emails, and contrary to what I said
before, I don't know that I see a detail
uh email. I we were having some
communications issues earlier today. Uh
treasure was sending out various things
and um maybe it's in my personal email
and my not my account, my town account,
but I don't see I don't have it either.
I don't I don't have it either.
>> I don't have a a line by line breakdown
of what you're talking about. I I mean,
all of that sounded fine, but I I don't
have the the detail.
>> Okay.
>> I'm not sure why it went to Kate.
>> Okay. I will tomorrow go in the office
and resend it to Kate and ask that she
get it to all members of the board. As
far as the town is concerned, we get a
form that just has our bottom line of
the budget.
>> And I've been asked in the past to
provide the breakdown and I did send it
to Kate and ask that it be passed on and
that's beyond me once I've sent it. And
uh I will send it again tomorrow and ask
that she pass it on.
>> Okay. Um, the other question I have is
actually a little
uh sideways from that, which is, as you
know, I pro I missed the last CIP
meeting. I couldn't make it. I was out
of state. And I know that you brought
forward a request for about $100,000 for
a compressor.
Can you just tell me because I mean,
I've been on CIP a while and I've been
on board of finance a while. Um, what
the story is with the compressor. Is the
old compressor breaking down? uh or is
it just aging?
>> Two things. One is aging and parts are
starting to become hard to find and we
are starting to have maintenance issues.
The third thing that I explained to CIP
is that our present vendor that services
it has two people that service
compressors because of the age of our
compressor was purchased in I believe
1991.
The technology has changed dramatically
and the older gentleman that does the
service is fine, but if he's not around,
we have to wait for service because the
other gentleman is totally lost looking
at this old technology.
The other thing I have to tell you is
that since that meeting, I've got two
other quotes which are substantially
less than the $100,000.
>> Okay?
uh both are somewhere in the ballpark of
$60,000
and again the age of the unit and now
the reliability is starting to go away.
That's why we're looking to make with
the replacement.
>> Okay. And that's obviously for everybody
on the board that's that's a capital
request, not an operating budget issue.
But when we get to capital, um, and this
is something I've mentioned to Lisa
before, you know, when we evaluate
capital, we got to figure out what's in
the fire equipment fund now, visav what
the fire equipment what what is needed.
And this would be this would come out of
that fund if if we were to approve it.
So, we need to know that there's in fact
$60,000 or so in there. And if it's not,
aside from what we have to do every
year, which is now to pay for the the
new truck, uh we have to make sure we
have the amount of money there if we're
going to approve this
to fund that. So, that's something TBD,
uh I've been asking about fund balances,
we're going to get there. Uh Lisa's
working on it, you know, we'll get we'll
get there. But thank you, Wally. I
appreciate that cuz I I missed that
meeting and I just, you know, I normally
be there and and would have listened and
everything and I was just in Boston. So,
thank you for that.
>> I do have a question, Rob.
>> Go ahead.
>> Is are you looking to fund this for the
next budget year or
>> the compressor?
>> Yes,
>> I think he is.
>> Yes. Normally,
>> okay,
>> it's for July one that we're looking for
the expenditure. We're not looking to
take it out of it during this budget
year. The present unit is functional.
It's not an extreme emergency, let's
say, to replace it now. And if there was
a problem, we have a backup utilizing
mutual aid department where we could
take our bottles to be filled,
>> right? So, it's one of these things
where we have to decide as a board at
some point whether we kick the can here
or
to me the the the first the the way to
start with that question is what's our
balance? What do they have in there?
Because if the fire department fund has
the money and they say they need it,
then my inclination would be to say
okay. But if we need to load money in in
order to make this happen, it becomes
more difficult. So, well, we'll get back
to you on that. And and obviously when
you get those you have those new quotes,
obviously you're going to take those to
CIP. I assume the next Yep. And I'll be
there. So, we'll talk about it. But that
that's great. Thank you. Um, okay. So,
we're looking at a 1.5 increase. Uh,
does anyone else have any questions
regarding the details of that? I mean,
we don't have a spreadsheet in front of
us to look at for every line item, but
Wally kind of ran us through it.
Do we have any questions there as to
those increases and whether or not you
know what the justifications are?
I mean just speaking personally um 1.5
is not doesn't strike me as crazy. Um
you know and and the capital thing is a
separate issue. So thank you. I mean,
unless there's questions, I'm going to
thank Wall-E and let him go for now. We
can always, you know, have a further
discussion with him. But,
>> all right. If there's questions once I
get this paperwork to you, I'll be glad
to come back. And I thank you. I truly
appreciate being first on your agenda
tonight rather than after the board
event.
>> Oh, wow. No, that was that was clear,
Wally. I knew it was going to be a lot
faster. Thank you so much. And uh
>> Thanks,
>> Yep. Thank you. And we'll let you go,
sir. Unless you want to hang out and and
enjoy the board of ed stuff with us.
>> I'm going to move on and I'm going to
turn the table over to our
superintendent, Valerie Bruno, to
present to us the board of ed budget.
Val
Val, you're unmuted, but I can't hear
you.
>> There's some weird audio stuff going on.
Does everyone hear that?
>> Yeah, it's like a weird robotic noise.
>> Agreed. I hear nothing from Val, which
is unfortunate. So, okay, we'll give you
two minutes.
I can't hear a word you're saying. I'm a
really good lip reader. She's joining
from her iPad, I think. So,
>> yeah, of course, we couldn't get through
this without a second technical
technical difficulty, right?
>> Uh well, yeah.
Yeah, Val, if I see a popup saying let
you join, I will. Uh I don't see one.
And in the past when we've had people
logged in in two different ways, it's
caused an echo. So be aware of that.
It says the host has joined. I don't see
Hold on. I'm looking.
I see no way to let you in. You know
what? You may want to log all the way
out and I'll let you back in.
Maybe she can call in.
>> Yeah. Well, she's trying through her
iPad. She's trying through through
through different methods.
>> Yeah.
>> Which fair enough. Um I feel like we had
this once before. It was bizarre. And
normally we don't have this issue.
Um but I have it.
I would think I'd be getting a popup. I
mean, as I let people in at the
beginning of this meeting, I got a popup
every time and had to approve sight in.
So, I just don't see any additional
pop-ups.
Admit.
Admit. I think I just found it. Bal.
All right. Unmute and try again.
>> Still muted.
>> Yeah, she's still muted. I know. Try
again though. Yep, there you are.
>> Huzzah.
>> It's funny because it says you're muted,
but we could hear you. I don't know
what's going on.
>> Okay. Are we good now?
>> Yes.
>> Okay. So, the only thing I have to make
sure I do then, Rob, is
>> let's see. Make sure that I can get to
it on this this device. The stuff I want
to share. Okay. So, you do have to, I
think, make me a co-host and allow me to
share the screen. Is that Hold on. Let's
see. Yes,
>> let me work on that because again, I'm
new to this.
>> Yep.
>> I will work on that. Um, if you want to
start and I'll I'll work on it. Host
tools probably.
>> Yeah. Um, so I did send a couple of
things to the board members today just
because I wasn't sure kind of how many.
I know you guys don't have a whole lot
of time right now, so I wasn't sure
which meetings you were able to watch
and attend and which meetings you
weren't able to watch and attend. So, um
I just kind of sent you everything. I
sent you the um budget that was uh
passed as the proposed budget by the
board of education. Um and then I sent
you some information on enrollment
summaries. Um kind of anything we've
talked about at the board of ed up till
now. Um, let's see. Does it let me share
my screen?
>> I just made you co-host, so it should
hopefully work.
>> Okay,
let's see if it's going to allow me to
do that.
Let's see if it's going to allow me to
All right.
Is it going to let me do that or not?
We're we're we're batting a thousand
here tonight.
>> I know it's I'm sorry, everybody. This
is new to me and uh apologies.
>> Can you see some Can you see something
on my screen right now?
>> I just see you,
>> Rob. Sometimes it takes a few minutes
for the co-host thing to show up, you
know, to to share and show a photograph
or whatever they're sharing.
>> Oh, really?
>> Yeah. Sometimes there's a delay.
>> I definitely did.
>> Okay. So, we're going to try this a
couple of times, but you know, in the um
interest of time here,
>> can I suggest if you sent it to Rob?
Rob, can you share the file that she
wants you to bring up because you had
>> That's the other possibility.
>> So, which folly would you like him to
bring up first, Valerie?
>> Okay. So, um let's Rob do this. Hold on
one sec.
>> Let me go back through my emails and
find the thing. Well, actually, let's
see.
I can probably get you to
h all of these difficulties.
Um, I'm trying to get you to the
PowerPoint
uh that uh was on here.
Let's see. Let me go back.
>> All right. If I go to your information
shared email,
uh, is there one of those that I want to
use or those that's background info?
>> Email you sent at six o'clock tonight.
>> We're now sharing somebody here.
>> All right. So, if we are sharing
>> Oh, it's you. It's you. Okay.
>> You're up there, kiddo.
>> You're up there finally. Okay, good.
>> Let's see. I'm up there. But now, let's
see. So, we need to share screen. Hold
on.
We need to share.
>> Can you see?
>> Huzzah. Okay, we're good.
>> All right, that uh was the very long
way. So, all right, we're going to do it
this way. If I do this, I obviously I
can't see any of you guys at all on my
screen, but can you see what's on my
screen right now?
>> All right,
>> launching the operational budget.
>> This is kind of weird for me only to see
this, but
we're going to do this. All right. So,
this was the budget. I'm going to go
through this fairly quickly just because
this was the budget presentation for the
board of education that is already
recorded and available for anybody to
see, but it'll give us, you know, a
little bit of um review for anybody who
didn't have time to do them. Oh, and the
purpose of this one was just to remind
people that the school only has an
operational budget. So in fact this is
the school and everything else related
to 35 school road facility because we in
fact do not have an operational and a
capital budget. So just everything
related to 35 school road. We had talked
about enrollment data. I sent you guys
tons of enrollment data. But two of the
things that I pointed out when I did
this at the board of education meeting
was K6 we have 200 kids. Although we
really aren't addressing preschool that
what do we anticipate in the building
next year? We anticipate 70 kids being
in preschool and by the end of the
school year 270 kids um total within the
walls of the building and three that we
financially support at other facilities.
We are growing. I had pointed out that
this year the new Andover uh POCCD which
is the plan of conservation and
development document came out which is
going to give us 2026 through 2036
and in that document
um we were able to let's see right here
in that document that looks like this
the plan of conservation and development
for the town um it was able to confirm
that in fact we've made a 26% growth uh
in the last 5 years. Um, and moving
forward, we should have a slow and
steady anticipated growth. I know you
saw a chart that kind of looks like that
one down there with the blue bars. When
RAM did theirs, there was like a yellow
bar that showed you this year and then
the rests were fairly even.
>> Um, we do anticipate moving that bar up.
This one is through 2025. And the reason
why I put this in here is because this
is the one that was in the POC to show
you that when they took a 10-year
average, it wasn't fair for the last
time because we saw a decline and then
it started to come back up. So, the
incline that you will see um this year
uh in the new PC
will show that it was a 26% increase
moving forward. I know that some of
those numbers were looked at for
planning purposes for uh the next five
years. Um enrollment reports I gave you
guys all the way back that I sent you um
those enrollment reports all the way
back through uh the last 15 years. That
was part of your packet. There's no
reason for us to put it up on the screen
now. Those are available online on the
board of education website as well. But
this is this year's. And when you look
at the enrollment reports on the board
of education monthly reports, you see it
just like this. This was January's. You
see how many classes there are in every
grade. You see how many kids there are
in every class. And then you see every
grade to the right there. The reason why
that's important for us is because as
some people pointed out, they said,
"Well, what do you need a second sixth
grade for?" Those 29 kids, which yes, we
have 29 kids in one class. this year
will be moving up to RAM. But if you
look at grade five, there's 26 kids
currently. So trying to squeeze the
genie back into the bottle and move them
into one class is just not feasible. And
the grade behind them that's going to be
fifth grade next year, there's 37 kids
in that grade. That's impossible. That
must be two classes. So last year we did
have that second fourth grade and the
second fifth grade class. And where
sometimes that number looks misleading
is sure you can see large fourth grade
classes 18 and 19, but sometimes people
look at the fifth the the fifth grade
class and they go well 13 and 13 is
manageable. Remember we only have two
choices. It's 26 or it's 13 and 13. We
don't get to kind of split it in
between. So that's the dilemma. What's
right for kids, 13 and 13 or 26? And you
guys have heard me talk about this
before. the ideal numbers to be under 22
no matter what study it is that you look
at. So okay and this was just that quip
that was in the POCCD draft from January
at the board of selectman meeting and it
does explain there is the um increase um
and that they should be um considering
the fact that we are rebounding when we
plan for the next 10 years.
You lose my voice. I'm sorry. I put this
slide in here. This was in our board of
education um budget proposal uh
presentation. I left it in here for a
couple of reasons. If you hadn't seen
this, you'll see that hein was
highlighted on here instead of Andover.
That's cuz I took these slides right
from their um presentation because they
put together a slide that shows you the
dur. And a dur is a district reference
group. It means the state has determined
all of the other towns that are like us
in every way, shape, or form. District
reference group. Um, and you will see
that there's 22 to 23 and 23 to 24. What
you normally see is the this is per
pupil expenditure. And what you normally
see with per pupil expenditure is they
go up every year. You'll notice in the
first one in 2022, if you find us, um,
we were 22,832
there. The average was $22,332.
Um, you'll see that we are number 11 in
2223. And most of these numbers are
fairly close. Um, it that's true. If you
look at the last published one, which
was 2324 on the right there, you will
see that the average was 23,670.
We dropped we dropped from 11 to 17. And
that's because we were the only one on
this list. If you're comparing apples to
apples here, every town, Cornwall,
Canton, Colombia, we were the only town
that went down in our per pupil
expenditure. And that's because as our
student population rises, if we're not
spending at the same level on each
student as the other districts, we're
going to go down. We are the only one on
this list that did not go up from 22 to
23 in our per pupil spending. So that is
that that that's significant.
Now I know that um at when Colin uh
presented there were some questions on I
believe it was NC versus NCE versus per
pupil expenditures
and Colin even had said to you guys um
all of those numbers are legitimate
numbers and there are formulas but they
are relative and they are mostly
relative to larger districts not really
to us. To me it's not really relative
because it's not a per pupil. We're not
just buying crayons and paying for
teachers with this money. We are taking
care of the largest piece of property in
the town with this. So when we look at
this, this is everything. This is, you
know, the the new snowblower, a little
piece of that is in here with the
pre-approval spending as well. Um so the
number is kind of irrelevant to me. It's
irrelevant because um what the taxpayer
really needs to know is the bottom line.
here's what it costs to educate the
kids.
Here's how many um taxpayers we have.
You take the total and you divide it by
um you know the the number of kids and
that is what it's costing them per
pupil. And for us that number is
significantly lower.
Um, the other thing that we pointed out
when I made this presentation to the
board of education was that one of the
reasons why we're going to continue to
go down on that list that I just showed
you is that last year we did reduce by
160,000 yet our number of students went
up. So where we dropped from 11th place
to 17th place, I guarantee that next
year we're going to drop even lower on
that list.
Remember
>> to clarify, by the way, Val, this is all
the some of the numbers that we're
looking at here.
>> I think everybody should remember
there's a lag time here. We're getting
>> the stuff you get from the state and
everything like that. There's a lag time
of a year or two. So, we're talking
about stuff,
>> you know, and then we do things in our
budgets and it doesn't show up until
next year. That sort of thing. So,
that's where I think a lot of people can
get confused. So, I just want to point
that out.
>> Yes. And that's why those numbers, Rob,
too, they're um they're a little off,
especially for me. They if our let me
think of a town, Marorrow, Marorrow's
town population, their Ksix population
is actually very consistent. They really
um in the six years that I've been here
anyways, they don't really waver. Their
blue bars, so to speak, remain fairly
constant. So whether you're looking at
NC or NCE or per pupil expenditures,
they do play stay very steady um you
know in planning as does their budget
then every year as well um because there
aren't big dips or increases. So I do
anticipate as I said next year that
we'll fall even further um down on that
list. So this was past budgets and what
the taxpayer um saw as our budget.
I went back 10 years. I did 2015 through
until last year uh 2526.
And where we're falling behind and and
this is part of the reason why this year
it's a bigger ask than people are used
to is in 2015 you'll see we had 4.32.
That had been a reduction from the year
before and then no increase and then it
was reduced and then it was reduced
again and then it was reduced again and
then it was reduced again. And if you
want to know by how much it's the number
on the right. it was reduced by uh
45,000 and then 120 and 90 and 162 and
then a 0% increase. And so we did get
increases those last four years, but we
were back in the hole. And so when you
take 2015 to 2025, the two bolded
numbers on there, and you add up the
pluses and the minuses, in the end, what
you're getting is $244,000
over this 10year
period. Keeping in mind that every year
there are contractual obligations and
salary increases, there's cost of living
adjustment, there are things that needed
to be fixed. Here um at 35 School Road,
we had a lot of expenses. And so I do
know that there are some people that
said, "Well, see, we cut we cut the
school." And and they somehow managed,
but I I want to tell you, but they
didn't manage during those five years.
Um during those five years in the middle
there, the red ones, there was a cut to
a reading support person. There was a
cut to an assistant principal because
enrollment was going down, so they
didn't um necessarily need to keep that
assistant principal. There was cut to a
classroom teacher. There was a cut to
the IT manager. Um there was a cut in
hours or reduction to the business
manager. There was a reduced hours for
the speech and language pathologist.
There were reduced hours to the
librarian, the art teacher, the Spanish
teacher, a custodian. So how did they
manage that? They managed that by simply
losing six and a half people. So that's
a tough one. That's a real tough one.
They didn't manage it. It wasn't that
there was extra money that they were
able to come up with. Those losses cut
deep.
Now, Caitlyn mentioned ECS dollars, and
I don't think we've talked about ECS
dollars in my six years here enough
because that is a revenue source that
offsets the cost of K12 education to the
taxpayer.
So, when we look, for example, at the
budget this year, which we'll look at in
just a second, and we get to, well, it's
5.063 063 million val actually it's it's
not that much to the taxpayer because
when you take those ECS dollars so for
example this year we're asking for
$499.91
for ECS dollars sure if you took that
and you divided it by 200 kids you're
looking at $25,000 a kid but if you take
that $1.2 $2 million in ECS dollars that
would be credited to our 200 kids has to
be credited to educational cost sharing.
The town cannot spend that money that
they receive on anything else. Our
budget then gets offset and this current
school year it was 17827
and next year it would be 19,227.
And if you go back to those slides that
I showed you what the average spending
is in each of the towns in our DUR, it's
22,000. So we are well below the
average. And I know a lot of people say
that can't be, but it but it is the
truth. Um, and so when we look at
what goes into our budget, as I
mentioned on page one, in addition to
everything school related, 35 school
road, all of these things are in that
budget as well. Every academic need for
each student, the mandated special
education requirements, the contractual
obligations to every employee, insurance
and benefits, all board of education
expenses, legal fees, transportation,
including transportation to other
facilities, tuition for Andover
residents that attend other schools, um
all the supplies, whether they're
instructional facilities, etc.
technology, utilities, um the use of the
town vehicle for special ed
transportation, repair and maintenance
for this large building, and remember
our gym is used um every night and
weekend in the summer. Uh so half the
time the gym gets used by town events,
and that's fine, but there is no
different budget for that. Last year it
was over $10,000 in oil for the tank
that services just the gym. And so there
are some significant costs. And again,
I'll remind you that our big drivers,
not the only things, but our big drivers
are obviously contractual salary
obligations, the need for that second
sixth grade classroom to return, special
ed services, and our insurance
consortium is 15% for the premiums for
our employees. Now,
someone mentioned not necessarily this
year, last year. So, I'd really try to
take a second and explain this. Well,
why don't we go someplace else for
insurance then? We can't. We are part of
an insurance consortium. It is the town
of Andover, which I think has five or
six um people uh in the insurance. Um
and so it's a lot less than ours. So,
that increase does not affect that
budget as much as ours, but it's still
15%.
the town of Andover, uh, the town of
Marorrow, Marorrow Board of Ed, the town
of Hein, Hein Board of Ed, um, RAM and
AHM. So, the eight of us are member of
it. We've been in this consortium for
over a decade, so we don't have the
option, and usually it's not 15%, so the
the rates are lower, so we we usually
feel lucky. This year just happens to be
one of those years. Um, but I can't shop
around. So, that's a non-negotiable for
me within the budget. So, if there was
ever a cut to the budget, I can't cut
this line item. Nor can I cut the
contractual salary obligations once the
board of education enters into that
contract. That's it. Okay. So, before I
put up the um actual line item line
item, um the percentages where they were
6.6% 6% of our increase was human
expenses. Those were salary. All the
benefits was about 2.9. Transportation
was about.5
and that was the 10% and everything else
combined equaled that other one.
>> Um when we looked at
>> Can I just ask a quick question? Sorry.
When salaries of all staff combined, um
uh that's that's your contractual.
>> Yes. because
>> but also this new teacher too, right?
>> Yes. Yes. Um and we took the median on
that one.
>> Okay. Just want to be clear on that, you
know. So, you have you have two things
going on in terms of your human
expenses, right? You have your your 3%
or whatever. It's roughly 3% mandated uh
increases. I think that contract's two
years old now, right? Um but it's 3% a
year.
>> Contract the teachers.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. So, that one actually, no, we
settled it last year and they're in year
one and we
>> don't settle it for three more years.
It's a four-year contract,
>> right? And and they're basically 3% a
year, right? Roughly
>> roughly um and again, I'm sorry not to
look right at you, Rob, but I can't see
anybody. Um we have uh roughly sometimes
what happens is is they have three and a
half one year two and three/4ers another
year but in the end if it's 12% over
four years we're going to say it's
average of three. Same thing with the
nonert contract because we have two
unions. Um they have a four-year well
they had a four-year contract. So we
know for the next three years exactly
how much we can anticipate on a
yeartoear. And if somebody doesn't know
what those contracts are, they're online
um on our website. But um we know
because it's a chart and it says if
you're on this step um and you have this
degree, this is what your salary is
regardless of what you teach. So you
could be a math teacher, third grade
teacher, whatever it is. If you're in
the teachers union, that's our salary
scale,
>> right?
>> Okay.
>> All right. And that could obviously be
affected by somebody getting their
masters and and getting that stuff up.
>> Yes. Yes. So, there's a line in the
budget that'll say tuition reimbursement
and um that one tells us because every
year they have to tell us before we put
the budget together if you're taking
classes and if you anticipate moving up
to a next step um during the next uh
fiscal year. So, so we have a good
handle on that.
>> Okay.
>> Thanks.
>> Yep. Um anybody else from the board?
You'd have to just chime in and stop me
because I can't see you. Um, so none of
the expenses that can be cut. Um, so we
already reduced to the bare bone for our
known expenses. A lot of federal grants
have dried up and I know that one of
your guests here um had a question um
about one particular line item and
spoiler alert, I'll answer it for her
now. Um, it was a grant that dried up
where we had to put it back in the
budget. So state grants moving forward,
they're scant. um most of them are going
to be limited to early childhood because
in 2027 the state will be going to
universal preschool and so a lot of the
state money right now is tied up there.
So what we're really down to is title
grants and IDEIDA grants. Um and those
are really the only ones that we're 100%
sure are going to remain intact and the
town's ECS dollars because when I say
there's $2 million in ECS dollars that
does go directly to the town. it does
not go to the school. So, those are the
ones we know about. And just so that I
don't forget to say it later, if we have
a salary that is paid by a title grant
or an idea grant, it's not in the
budget. We've already left it out
knowing that we're going to get that.
So, what happens if we don't get the
money we need? Um, we will have to cut
teachers. Uh, there will be a pink slip.
It'll be inevitable. Um, we are going to
have to look to merge classes. And those
numbers would mean the largest classes
not only in Andover history, but in the
region and the state for the most part.
Um, and I know you guys know we've
looked at numbers at our middle and high
school for grades 7 through 12. We've
looked at numbers in Hebrin. So that's a
fact. Um, no matter what grade we merge,
if it was first, second, third, fourth,
fifth, or sixth, it would mean that our
classes would be 24 to 28. And again,
that's important because it is true that
sometimes people look at our enrollment
numbers and they say, "Well, but you
have two classes of 12." It's true, but
the alternative is one class of 24. And
that golden number is always 22. Once
you hit 22, there is a detriment to um
elementary school kids to have that
class. Um and keep in mind that isn't
just, oh well, that makes it difficult
for a teacher in a classroom. There are
lots of other reasons why we actually
can't have classes that large. Um there
are special education students in every
grade and oftent times then you would
not be satisfying the needs of those
special education students within the
least restrictive environment if you
have too many children in there.
Hypothetically, if you have um students
with physical handicaps, you physically
can't put other children in the class if
you've met the maximum that fit in there
while they're still able to get around
in a classroom. So, there's a lot of
things that we do have to consider
there. Um yeah, and so I want you to
understand that I was a former special
ed director, as you guys all know. I've
mentioned that before. It is a fact that
you very oftentimes increase special
education costs when you have these
classes that are larger. Because if a
teacher has 28 kids in a classroom and
your block of time is 60 minutes, they
average 2 minutes per student of
individual instructional time as needed.
And if there is a larger number, if
there are a larger number of special
education students in the classroom that
they are tending to, that's oftentimes
when somebody will say,"I can't do this
particular group of students on my own.
There's too many. I can't provide tier
1, 2, and three instruction." And we
wind up having to add a pair of
professional to the room. And I know
they did do that years ago, and that was
very common place in a lot of districts.
But the problem is is nowadays with the
retirement pension package and insurance
we just saw 15% increase and the salary
a paraprofessional
can be more expensive and not less
qualified in the sense of their love for
children but less qualified in the sense
of their ability to have the background
knowledge for special education services
and tiered interventions. And so that is
not necessarily where people go anymore.
So
>> Valerie,
>> yes,
>> it's Louise. Can I can I interrupt for
just a second? Okay. I have a question
about um when you say you get to the 22
limit, are there regulations stating
that if you get to that limit, then you
do need to add a pair of professional.
>> So not for 22. No, there's not. That is
just good practice. That is just every
study that you see. Um, and that is why
Louise, since I've been here, and I had
sent you guys the enrollment data, like
I said, all the way back. Since I have
been here, I have it right here
someplace. Um, since I've been here, um,
it has happened six times
um that we have gone above and beyond um
the 22. But, oh, I have it right here.
But that's because Louise um oftentimes
it it didn't start out the school year
that way. So maybe the class started off
with 20 and then during the course of
the year a third grade just happened to
get two more kids and they were both
third grade in our our school. So that
wouldn't be a situation where we would
say, "Oh my goodness, we have 22. We
have to open a second class." That would
be silly and ridiculous. Um but if we
know that going in um you do have to
plan for the special needs of the
students and what if more kids move in.
So a while back when the enrollment
numbers were going down eight years ago
um if it happened it was a rarity. Um
currently we have uh only the sixth
grade right now because we have two in
every other grade. But prior to that um
the year before we had three classes 22,
27 and 27. The year before we had 22 and
24. The year before we had 22. Um and so
uh two years before that we had two at
22. because we were trying to um keep
the numbers keep from opening a second
class when we weren't sure at that time
how quickly we would be increasing
enrollment. So we couldn't take that
chance. What if we opened a second class
and then enrollment didn't change at
all? Um, and so if you guys remember at
one point we did have for two years a
combination two three class and you know
we were able to pick the right students
to to go into that combination class. We
were able to pick the right teacher. We
were being very very um frugal uh with
the budget that year and saying we could
do this. So I'm not opposed to having
classes of 22 if it's appropriate. Um,
but we've got classes now that are well
over that. Um, and that that's just
that's just not viable right now for us.
>> Okay.
>> I'm just going to pipe in here just
really quick and mention that you know
what Val just said about the hybrid
classes. That was my kids class one
year. Um, you know, my my kids are now
both at RAM, but my youngest daughter,
her fifth grade experience was that
hybridy kind of thing that AES did where
they had one class of 22. I believe it
was 22, might have been 23, somewhere
right in there, low 20s.
And
then there were breakouts where the
advanced math kids went and did stuff
with Mrs. Frraasier and then other kids
did something else and I had a whole
conversation with my 12-year-old about
this about retrospectively about her
experience. The next year she went to
sixth grade and I think it was 22 or 23
kids and it was one teacher and there
was no support. There was no extra
support, right? And she has very very
definitive thoughts about this that
actually surprised me to be honest with
you. I had this conversation with her
driving her to gymnastics one day and I
was kind of blown away by it. She was
very definitive about it that fifth
grade was vastly superior to sixth and
that was
that was not two teachers that was you
guys kind of adding in not I won't say
ad hoc but you were you were kind of
plugging in what you could to that grade
and it mattered to my kiddo. I can tell
you that.
Well, that's that, you know, I've I've
had an amazing 30 years of experience.
Um, and before that, I can tell you some
of you might know this because I' I've
shared this at board of ed meetings. I'm
a twin and um my twin um was it's a boy
um one of those students that had lots
of behavioral issues and I was actually
quiet and shy as a kid. And I went to a
school district where uh it was a large
school district, but in those days back
when um it was common place if you had
that extra five kids in each grade to
create combination classes. They did
this in the 70s um and into probably
like 80 81. And um so I was always in a
combination class. My brother was in the
traditional class which was larger but
they had support and I was in that
combination class. I had been the
youngest of the grades. I had been the
upper of the grades and so um I had
teachers that did it right and I had
teachers that didn't do it right. So I
had a lot of experience between that and
my special ed when we did that here Rob
when we had to do that and a lot of
families were nervous about that. it
worked at the time. And actually, the
last group is that group that's in
fourth grade now where there's 37 um in
those two classes. That's the last group
that um would have, you know, had that
kind of uh mix. It's just not
appropriate for the number of kids that
we have now. Um it just isn't. But I did
utilize that before. So, I'm not I'm not
afraid to do outside of the box things
if it's appropriate for kids. I I bring
it up both to kind of support what
happened in the past, but also, you
know, to bring it up when we look at
that sixth grade number and people have
questions and, you know, you're looking
at 25ish kids in that grade. Uh, you
know, which is like three more people
than were in that that hybrid group. Um,
and I bring it up only for that reason.
>> Yep. But we do have to just do what's
right for every group of kids, too. And
sometimes, like I said, if if you have a
handicapped child, that classroom cannot
exceed a certain number and have them be
able to get around the room. So, for
that room, it wouldn't be appropriate to
be over however many we can fit in there
with the desks or the tables. Um, there
are other classes that I've had
throughout the years that, um, you know,
it would have been entirely appropriate
for us to keep 23 in there and not split
it. You guys might remember the year we
reopened for COVID. Um, we had
kindergarteners that second year that
had not had preschool and they'd been
wearing masks and we found the
communication difficulties with those
children starting to cause a lot of
referrals for special education. And we
fought really hard that year. Just that
year, we had 30 kids and we needed three
kindergartens. And people said, "Three
kindergartens? You're going to have 10,
10, and 10?" The needs of the children
meant we had to because they were not
they had lost so much. They were not
getting what they needed and those
classes needed to be 10. We did it for
that year and that was it and it worked
out fantastically well. So, okay. And
so, um, I put this slide in here because
there had been some stuff on social
media a couple weeks ago where somebody
had asked a question about, you know,
basically a comment that I made, um, at
a board meeting where I said like, "It's
our turn." And, um, somebody I I think
was a little, um, taken aback by that,
um, with what I meant from it because it
was out of context. This is what I meant
by it. Um, Andover has had a lot of
great commitments to the town in the
past 10 years. Um, I've been here six
years and I've seen some fantastic
things happen here. Um, this is a list
of them. I mean, Andover should be
thrilled and everybody would tell me the
same story. Value have no idea how it
was. We hadn't put money aside for this.
We hadn't done that. We'd been promising
to build a community center. You know,
uh, our public works equipment was just
awful. We didn't have enough. They would
tell me these stories and I'd say that's
terrible. But that level of commitment
by the boards, by the town, by the
taxpayer, that level of commitment's
been there. We have not asked for that
level of commitment to be K6.
And that's where I say it's time. It's
time for us to recognize that I showed
you a slide before. We lost $418,000
in five years. Our numbers are going
back up. Younger families are moving in.
I am just asking for that same level of
commitment this year to the K6 that we
have made. And and it's been a great
level of commitment. Um but that's what
I meant when I said that the same level
of commitment, not choosing one or over
the other. It's just in different years
there are different things that need to
be done. Sometimes it was public works,
sometimes it was the mower, sometimes it
was the community center. And I feel
that this year it is a bigger ask than
normal. But I do think that the taxpayer
should consider all these wonderful
other things that we've been able to do
that are finished and in a little focus
meeting to go there. Now, I'm going to
go back to ECS dollars for a second. Um,
I know Caitlyn brought that up, but the
proposed operational increase for AES uh
is is shell shock for somebody. Um, 200
kids brings us up to um, you know, 5.063
million. Um, after the offset of ECS
dollars, as I mentioned before, it would
bring us to 3.845.
Same thing with RAM. And I know I'm not
here to to to preach for RAM, but if we
start looking at our educational costs
in the budget, not as RAM, not as AES,
not as the town side, and we say we have
a responsibility to K12. And so that
responsibility in the general fund
budget, if we added them together,
there's 129 kids at RAM, there's 200
kids with us, and we look the total
after the ECS dollars, the $2 million
would be 7.315.
And if we're looking at that, we're
looking at percentages.
This was I know it's a little bit
blurry. I just noticed that this was
what I pulled out of your draft budget.
Um, and I know you guys are still
working on it, so this is, you know, not
a permanent number, but
uh, Lisa the treasurer had put this out
in the draft. And right now, if you look
at RAM and AES's, it's about, and I
won't hold her to these numbers because
you guys are still working on it, but
our two combined would be about 7.16%.
and about 7%
for us to have a K12
um level of commitment I don't think is
is a bad starting number and then when
you take that $2 million that we have in
ECS dollars and you offset it now we're
talking more about like five and a half
so I do think that if we consider those
um yeah that that's actually it on this
one so I'm going to stop sharing this
screen Rab, if I can do that. Um, let's
see.
Stop share. Okay. Um, if we can consider
doing that and really kind of taking a
look at it from that perspective, saying
yes, when we look at what's the
educational cost to the community is,
and we say, let's look at everything
together. I I think that that really
helps us to say our level of commitment
to K12. Um and and and it it is a lot.
Rob, do you have that budget that you
can now pop up that I sent you guys?
Because
>> one moment, Val, I'm sorry. Um
>> that's okay.
>> The
>> the line item because I'd like to
address some of the things that I know
that um one of your guest
>> Which email was it? I'm sorry. I have an
email from
>> I sent I sent to your board today. Yes.
And there are three attachments.
>> There are three attachments. Which one
do you want? I want the one that is the
proposed budget.
>> Okay. Because they're all named. They
don't have
>> I know. I'm sorry. I didn't realize you
were going to have to share them. I
thought I was going to be able to share.
>> All right. Hang on. Hold on a moment. Uh
recommend.
>> The first one that of the three.
>> Yeah, the first of the three. I just got
to get it. I have to spin it around.
It's It's coming up sideways.
>> Uh hang on a minute.
Uh, normally in a PDF I can right click
and and get this thing to spin and I
cannot do it. So, this is I mean unless
you want to turn your head 90 degrees to
the side, this is not super helpful. Um,
here I'll show you guys. Hang on.
>> You should have one of those little
>> There should be a little circle there
somewhere that you can click.
>> Yeah, I I'm trying. I'm trying.
Uh, I really am.
Uh my it may be
settings. It may be that I don't have
like the full Adobe
uh system, you know, program on my
on this old laptop. This this laptop has
been
it's been through some things. Uh let me
let me just try something here. Hang on.
>> Let's see. The other thing I can try to
do, Rob, is let me
>> I can back to you, but um
>> let me try to see
um share the screen
>> here. Let me let me show you. Hang on.
If I share my screen, all right, you
guys see my screen now?
>> It's coming through.
>> Okay.
>> All right. So, the thing is this is what
I see, right?
>> No, we're not seeing it yet.
>> Okay. Let me know if you see it when you
see it because I've got it up. It
started to come through. But
view modes. I got
this this thing is sideways and I can't
>> This is when we need our kids for this
kind of stuff.
>> This is I know. I I swear to God I used
to be the kid who changed my uh parents
VCR clock and now I can't do anything.
Um, this is super frustrating because I
in at work I have zeroed out the
program. Can you see this?
>> I could scroll it.
>> Can anybody see mine now?
>> All right, hang on. Let me let me stop
sharing, Val.
Um,
how do I stop? All right.
No, I see nothing from you, but I'm
going to try and see if I can do
something from the host.
No, you're still co-host. You're able to
do it. I don't know.
>> Oh, goodness gracious. We're not We're
batting a thousand here. Rob,
>> I know. I'm really sorry. I'm gonna turn
that off. One participant can share at a
time. You got it.
>> I think it's starting.
>> Go ahead, Rob. Now you try again. Rob,
>> try again.
>> You want me to share? Because again,
mine's vertical. It doesn't It's You
don't want mine. It's garbage.
>> If you download it, then can you turn
it? That's what I have to do.
>> Uh, hold on.
>> I downloaded it.
>> Great question. and then flipped it
around.
>> Oh, you did, did you? Oh, all right. All
right. Hold on one second.
Goodness gracious. Um,
>> can I just ask a question?
>> Yeah,
>> sure.
>> Um, Val, I you made that comment so fast
I didn't exactly catch what you're
saying. So, what are you saying? Because
I have the the school the two schools
combined being 7.1% increase. Is that
Yes. Is that what you said? Okay,
>> that is what I said. At least thank you.
>> Cuz I didn't get any. Whatever you sent
them, I didn't get. So I absolutely
>> if you could send that to me.
>> I absolutely took it right from your
numbers. You had seven something.
>> Yeah.
>> And then if we credited ECS revenue to
that is where I came up with just over
five.
>> Okay. All right.
>> The issue with that same page. The issue
with that obviously is everybody as
everybody probably knows the ECS funding
has been constant for about five years,
>> right?
>> Um, and it is
>> so that's just something to be aware of
like they haven't changed the ECS
funding in some time. The other thing
that people should be aware of, and this
is something Valerie and I have talked
about, is that in the past, well, up to
the future, up till right now,
we have never as a town, I don't think,
sat down and calculated a split. Uh, oh,
this much goes to REM, this goes to as
it's not how we do it. We just kind of
take it off the top
and
cumulatively deal with it. So,
>> and that's been an issue
>> and this is a potential issue going
forward if we get into
>> if you take if you take the rest of the
intergovernmental money. This is my
thing with the grant money too is if you
take that in those two revenue sections
and then you start take oh well this
comes off of public works this comes off
of here this comes off of there it
becomes very complex
>> and does Lisa
>> and that's something and that's
something Lisa that we need to talk
about some more like does it make sense
or is it stupid for something like for
me like town a road right we don't put
town a road in the budget do we
>> well you know it's funny. We didn't
where I last worked. So, this is news to
me just the other day. And I said,
"Where is this?" And they said, "It's in
a different like funding." And I was
like, "Why?" It's like,
>> "It doesn't make sense to me." Um,
>> right.
>> Of course, there's a lot of stuff like
the way capital is done that doesn't
make sense to me either.
>> But, um,
>> welcome to Andover.
>> Keep things simple and clear, but I'm
not finding that.
>> No, no, no. Lisa, you're not wrong. And
that and that's just it. Well, we do
things like town a road. I mean, people
see our budget in our capital budget.
For instance, last year we put $385,000
into the road budget, right?
>> And it was it's an important piece of
what we do in this town. Yes,
>> we did not spend 385,000 on roads. We
spent like way more than that because we
get town aid road money and we spend
that money and it's all off budget right
now. And I have always been like, okay,
but the thing is that's not clear to me
that's the right way to do it. So there
are a lot of things here that you could
question. Now back to the issue of me
sharing the screen. I literally
>> So I'm gonna I'll start to talk about
the line items while you're doing that,
Rob, so we're not waiting.
>> Because I cannot figure it out, Mal. I
cannot figure out how to spin this
bloody thing.
>> If so, Heather apparently figured it
out, but I can't.
>> Maybe you could let Heather share it.
Yeah, let Heather share it.
>> Yeah, let me go to Heather.
>> Okay,
>> so Lisa, one last thing, Lisa,
>> you're a co-host now, Heather. Huzzal,
>> one last thing, Lisa, on your point,
Lisa,
>> would be
>> the only difference is, and this is why
I mention ECS and not the other ones, is
>> we don't do the townside budget on a per
resident
e expenditure.
Traditionally, they do expect that that
number is going to come up for schools
because it's just out there, whether
it's that NCE, NC or per pupil
expenditures. The problem is is that
>> people look at that number and they say
per pupil. And so then you have to say,
well, to the taxpayer, it's minus that
um money that's, you know, earmarked for
schools. That's the only reason why I
say that. And I know exactly what you're
saying, but
>> yeah, because I've had other departments
like let's say the library department,
um, you know, it's like they get friends
of the library and they want to list
their budget, which I've never done
before, but they want to list their
budget is almost $4,000 less than what
their budget really is because they get
that money from the friends, but their
budget really is 4,000 more, right? So,
it's really hard to draw the line with
revenue and with your actual
expenditures.
There's a lot of that in this town if
you start to notice it, Lisa, where we
do we we have a lot of stuff that's off
budget because it's like offset.
>> But
>> you can do the same thing in the
building department, the clerk's depart
department. Look at the tax collector's
department.
>> And I mean, if we if we delve into this
enough, we're going to find that the
budget's wildly different because if you
get $800,000 in Town A Road, right? If
we're spending 1.1 million, not 385,000,
that changes the budget quite a bit,
doesn't it? Although ultimately, there's
no zero no zero difference to taxpayer,
right? But
>> yeah, we're getting a lot less than
that, though.
>> Yeah. No, no, I I made that number up. I
I just Yeah,
I'm just saying there's a like that.
>> Yeah.
>> So, okay. So, I I'll move on to the
other one then. And I realize and I
realize that um we've already done this
at the board of eds. So you know you you
most almost everybody on this call has
this in front of them. So if you look
through the first uh sections the 101
section there I know there was a couple
of questions. The questions that were
brought up had to do with the school
psychologist
um as well as the librarian. The
librarian did she's uh four days a week.
She's not five. and she did have a
portion of her salary that was covered
by a grant that we no longer have. And
so that has to go in. Uh that's why it
looks like it went up dramatically uh
for her is the the the one day which is
a 0.2 FTE that was covered by a grant is
no longer. Um the school psychologist
the school psychologist had been almost
completely covered by a grant for 2
years with the exception of 45,000
which is further down. When we get to it
I'll remind you and we minus that 45,000
from that line item further along in the
budget. So the 90,000 that you see up
here is not really 90,000. We are
minusing 45 someplace else later on in
the budget. So, um you'll see that, but
that was um an issue of a loss of grant
as well. I know the other day, and I'm
going to bring this up now because I
think it's appropriate. Um the the other
day there was a conversation at one of
the board of finance meetings. Um and I
apologize I wasn't on it, but I know
Louise is on here now and so is Linda
Fish and Kim. And somebody brought up
the question of um why we don't use AHM
for school psychologist services,
>> right? going to get to that. That's
exactly It was on my list of questions
asking.
>> Well, I'm going to beat you to the punch
there. Uh Mr. Chair, um AHM did not
provide psychologist services. AHM is a
youth mental health uh resource. They
are wonderful. I agreed with everything
you guys said as I was watching this on
on on my screen the other night um
going, they're right. They are
wonderful. I Tresa does a great job. We
love AHM.
But AHM is a mental health program
facility that provides um like
counseling services. Um they are not
licensed school psychologists. And the
difference is is when uh a student just
needs a group to talk about a crisis.
You know, mom and dad are getting
divorced and they need somebody to talk
to. Perfect for an AHM person. But when
it's in somebody's IEP that this person,
this child rather, has service hours
that need to be um given to them, oftent
times it has to be the school
psychologist.
Um
>> hang on one second, please.
>> There are um there are tests that are
done annually. It's called an annual for
a student with an IEP. that testing that
needs to be done annually has to be done
by a licensed professional. Um,
trianually every three years all special
education students have a full battery
of tests and those tests are provided by
a school psychologist. So what was
happening was back in 2022 23 at that
time we had um, as you guys know you
were talking about the new AHM contract
which is 112. Back then we had two
contracts. We had one contract for AHM
services where we paid 30,000
and then and and we were in getting a
day and a half a week of this wonderful
uh professional that we loved from AHM.
Um but then we had an additional
contract for a day and a half a week of
services. And that additional contract
cost us 30,000 back in 2022. And now
we're in 2026. So that year we saw a
decrease to our um at our ask to our
budget. And because we had a decrease in
our ask, we had to make some choices.
And because our testing for our special
education students, annual and trienal
reviews had to be done mandated by
somebody who was a licensed uh
professional. the wonderful um AHM
person that we had here. They were
family and mar uh family and marriage
counseling was their um specialty and it
was perfect for mediation for our
students but it didn't meet all of our
needs. So we could not get rid of the
then contracted services that we had
with I think we used at the time for
psychologist and we had to then
eliminate that second contract with AHM.
So that was the reduction because
although it was wonderful to have that
person, the extra day and a half, it did
not meet our mandated requirements and
it was 30,000. So we did cut that. We're
still happy to have the day and a half
that we have that comes with the towns
and all three towns get it. There's
somebody in Hebrin, somebody in Marboro,
somebody in Andover and um we're very
happy to have that. Four years later,
flash forward to four years later, and
we'd been using for a little while now
our school psychologist um a grant to
pay for the bulk of their services. Um
when we add on up the amount of hours
that we need to have them, um this
person was a little bit more than four
days. So, they were switched to the
teachers contract. And um being in the
teachers contract actually saves that
little bit of a difference for them
because we're not paying them as a
contractor anymore. Um but the long and
short of it is we couldn't continue to
use AHM's services for the testing
because it it it they they couldn't do
it and we lost the grant. So in that
line there, I hope that I've answered
the two questions that were asked.
Louise.
>> Yeah, I was going to tell you that I did
ask Tresa that question and she did
relay that same information you just
said because they you need specialized
people to do the IEPs. Um, was the
psychologist that you had a independent
contractor when she was hired
>> back in 2022? Yes.
when we when we were utilizing the one
that we have now um less uh a couple of
years ago when she first came to us, she
did come to us and we were paying her as
an independent contractor. Yes. Now to
pay her as an independent contractor 5
days a week would be well over the the
price to have her in a teachers union.
And so it's a cost savings to us.
>> Okay. So, are you also adding benefits
because she's now an employee?
>> Um, if she were to need benefits at some
point, yes. But that was factored into
the cost because an outside school
psychologist for us to bring in hourly
is between 90 and $140 an hour. And so
that was a factor for us um in putting
this person in the teachers union. um
they had been in the teachers union in
their other districts before they came
to us because that's common place. And
so when she came to us and she was
part-time and we said no because
obviously as you mentioned there's the
potential that a person would need
benefits, we kept her originally um when
she was part-time as a contractor, but
to do that five days a week Louise would
would be instrumentally more money. So
>> Okay.
>> I'm glad Yeah, I'm glad you did the math
on that. That's good.
>> We did.
>> Okay. Perfect.
>> Yes.
Yes. So, ideally, if there's a position,
and usually in a district, it's those
contractors, speech language, um, OTP,
um, school psychologist, a social
worker, a guidance counselor. In a
district that's a little bit bigger than
ours, all of them are in the teachers
union. For small districts, I would
never hear put OT or PT in a teachers
union contract in Andover. Never. I've
had years here with PT, for example. My
first and second year here, it was
months before I even met our PT because
we didn't have any kids my first year
that required it. I think she did one
hour a month um because it's the needs
of the the particular students. So, I
would never put those in um a union
contract. The only two that are
appropriate for us to have here in a
union contract um would be the speech
language pathologist because elementary
school, you know, prior to sixth grade,
a lot of speech and the one uh school
psychologist that we have because we
don't have other um support staff here
except for the day and a half that we do
have some support from AHM. So, okay. uh
the PAR educators. The next one uh down
there, you guys will notice that there's
a difference. Um from the last budget
season to this budget season, there was
an increased need per somebody's PE IEP
for um a PAR professional. Uh so that's
the increase there. They're not it's not
a huge contractual increase per PAR.
It's it was a different PARA, a new PAR
that was needed. Um, I won't go specific
line by line because we did that at the
board meeting, but I will note some of
the areas for you that would be of
interest if you were reading it for the
first time. Um, coaching and clubs
because I remember this came up at a
finance meeting. That is um the extra
things that teachers do by their
contract where they get paid for them.
Um, in their contract, for example, uh
there's uh the Memorial Day parade.
there was if they did the drama club,
things like that that are just um the
the yearbook.
We've minused that over the years. If I
had to contractually put in to our
budget everything that's in the teachers
contract, it would be 12,000. However,
in multiple years, we wind up with
afterchool grants. Um I've only had one
year in the past five that I haven't
been the recipient of one. And when that
happens and there are other after-school
activities for children to participate
in, the teachers generally don't run the
other ones. So that's the reduction
there because of the afterchool grant.
The next large increase I see on that
first page there that might be of
interest is where it says pension. Just
so you know, we do not pay anything for
teachers pension. Teachers retirement
benefits, they pay. The town does not
pay at all. However, MURF, which is the
municipal retirement that's paid to town
employees, is also paid to our
non-certified staff. That's an Andover
uh that's the whole town. So, that
increase there, it is um for uh the
non-certified union, pair professionals
um and the kitchen staff, the nurse,
anybody that's in that union. Um we
don't expect any retirements. So, we
eliminated that line this year so that
that money could be put toward the sixth
grade teacher. So, that's why it's
zeroed out because we're hoping that
there isn't anybody that's retiring this
year. If you um Heather can move that to
the next page.
Um you'll see the big increase there is
Thank you. Um is benefits line item. The
medical benefits are in this line item.
And as we talked about before, there's a
15% increase. We've also already
adjusted it to um include any of our
known changes. So if the fourth grade
teacher had a baby yesterday,
wonderful, beautiful baby that was eight
and a half pounds, by the way, um and
they wound up hypothetically um adding
that child to insurance. We've already
added that in for next year. the things
we know. Some staff members whose
children who turn 26 who go off their
insurance, ones we know are being added.
That's Jod's job is to go through and do
that and figure out all of the potential
changes to insurance. And um that's
built into the line item. So, we've
already done the math on that one.
You'll also notice here in the middle
where I said you're going to see it
empty out. Um I think her name was Anna.
Yeah, that Anna mentioned. you'll see
the $45,000 reduced there for
psychological services. It's not zero.
It's moved up to that first line item
where you see the 90 now. That's why I
said it's not $90 new. It is half of
that. Um we were lucky to have that
grant for a long time. I'm I'm grateful
for that. There isn't anything else on
this page that is a glaring increase or
decrease. There's a couple that go down,
a couple that go up. You see a minus 18%
on the middle section. A lot of things
moved from here and there. The one
change that we did make um was let's see
is it in this section here? Lunch. I'm
looking for lunch. Um yes. You will
notice two years ago there was $20,000
in that line item. The $20,000 in the
line item for lunch standard for 10
years. Um the understanding that that
was the worst case scenario for what
could happen with our responsibility for
lunch. We use Coventry Food Services.
They are a very good partner for us and
they're a good partner because they have
buckets,
hypothetically speaking, buckets. Um,
they keep an Andover bucket and a
Coventry bucket and all of the expenses
related to running our food service goes
into our bucket. So, if it's an Andover
cost for ordering something, if it's a
salary for the lady in the kitchen,
whatever it is, an expense goes in and
they're going to charge us for that. All
of our credits are whenever somebody
buys lunch, the money that we get from
the federal government for free and
reduced lunch, they put it in our bucket
and at the end of the year, we either
owe them or there's a little bit of a
surplus. During COVID, they were
wonderful. They said if we got this
money as a result of handover, we put it
in their bucket. We were able to buy a
few things for the kitchen. We bought a
refrigerator. We bought a stove because
at the end of that year, our bucket was
flowing over with extra COVID um money
because there was an increase. Worst
case scenario, if we don't sell enough
hot lunches, is that we would have to
pay a bill at the end of the year. And I
looked at the trends over the past
decade and said, did we really ever get
to 20,000? And we did not. So, I've left
it at five because that's been our worst
case scenario. And so I can't guarantee
next year. So if there's a a difference,
I don't want someone to say, "Why all of
a sudden is she going back up?" I think
five is safe for this year. So I've left
that. Um on the next page,
the glaring Thank you so much, Heather.
Um on the next page, the glaring
numbers, um and I mentioned them in my
presentation, are transportation costs.
So we have our buses, um that we pay
for. We also have um
special education transportation costs.
If we have any children that attend an
outplacement facility, a special
education outplacement facility, we not
only have to pay their tuition, but we
have to pay their transportation as
well. We do also pay to rent the town
vehicle. We have one resident in town
that um requires a handicapped vehicle,
so we pay the town of Andover to rent
theirs. $3.50 a mile. We also have a
student that attends RAM for a period a
day for accelerated um studies. So we
pay $3.50 to drive them to and from RAM
as well. That is built into this
transportation cost and that would be
the increase um there. The only other
one on this page that I would warn is
volatile is the special ed out placement
and the magnets down at 560. If you look
at 002-560
and those are volatile because
we sometimes get a bill for a child as a
resident of Andover that we've never met
before. Um this happened twice in the
last couple of years where we get a bill
for a child that's attending a magnet or
a charter school and it's like I don't
even know who this is. Maybe they're in
kindergarten or fifth grade and they
moved in. Whatever. It's our
responsibility then to prove residency
and if that child does in fact live in
the town of Andover, we have to pay the
tuition for the charter or magnet school
and everybody does. It's not different
in Andover. Um that would be built into
this cost the the 560 line item just
like our outplacements would be as well.
So that's a little volatile. The other
volatility to this is when we have a
special education outplaced student um
sure we attend the meetings and we are a
part of their planning but if that
school decides the child needs something
we get charged for it. So um we really
do have a limited amount of say in that.
Likewise, if a child attends a magnet
school and then is deemed special
education, we will then receive a bill
for the services for that child. So,
that one we should keep in mind is
volatile depending on when people move
in and what the status of their children
are. Couple more and then I think I'll
be almost done here. Um, you'll see we
have a lot of the separate supply line
items. None of them have changed. Um,
we've kept them um as is. um doesn't
mean that we always at the end um have
enough in the general fund to cover
those costs, but we've been fortunate in
the past few years where there are extra
supplies, for example, from the
afterchool program and we can utilize
those. Um and so we're we're okay
keeping it where it is as status quo.
And I will say the teachers are
fantastic. Um I do have to give a little
kudo to them on a daily basis. I see
emails back and forth between staff
members where they'll say, "Hey, anybody
have 10 straws for a project I'm doing?"
And they do they share. There is no
excess in their rooms that they're not
sharing with one another. Um,
and you'll notice this was another uh
concern I think for people when you look
at our utilities. We didn't go up on the
utilities. We kept them the same. We
kept them the same because as you guys
know, we have done a lot of energy
efficient things um going into this next
year. We are in the process of finishing
the solar which should be up and running
if mother nature will stop snowing. Um
that that will be up and running and
we're hoping to see a small difference.
Um you know, but remember the bulk of
where we're going to see the difference
and be able to to to make sure that we
track the trend data is going to be
June, July, and August. So, we're going
to have to wait and see what we, you
know, uh, get from June, July, and
August. The other thing is the board
just approved um, an Eversource
incentive program where we're going to
for going forward next year have the
pipes wrapped and things of that nature.
So, we are hoping at the end of next
year, even with a 0% increase, that we
won't go over any line item and maybe
see a savings, but we won't know what
that savings is. um the oil line item.
The reason why we didn't increase that
is because we lock in every year and we
locked in at $249.
And seeing what's in the news now, I'm
very glad we did lock in at $249
so that um we don't have to worry about
volatility there. Um and then the last
page just shows you at the bottom how we
wound up with the $499.91.
So that's the quick version if you
wanted to see anything a little bit more
detailed. Um, as Caitlyn said at the
beginning, we definitely do have um a
fair number of our meetings that are all
posted that people could um turn to.
Robert,
>> I am here. Thank you. Um
board members, you know, questions.
Let's let's do this. Um first of all,
thank you. That's an excellent
explanation.
>> You're welcome, Bill.
>> Thank you.
>> I I had a I had a question. This is
Heather. Go ahead, Heather.
>> Um,
the benefits,
>> which I know I no doubt are going up 15
to 18%. I work in insurance, so I don't
question that at all. Um, that's
>> everybody in including preschool
teachers that have benefits.
>> So, it's everybody that's that here.
Yes. That signs up would be in there.
>> Okay.
>> If they take it. Not every employee
does,
>> right?
But it does include the prek even though
so everything else for prek is covered
under their thing but not the b under
their budget but not the benefit.
>> Um if they take it then it would be and
heather the point with that that we've
discussed before is what we don't do is
remove the other items
from prek that would need to be in the
town's budget. Let me explain. There are
special education mandatory services
that are required for our preschoolers.
Um,
I'm going to speak hypothetically so
that no one thinks I'm talking about one
particular case. If there is a prek
student that has a onetoone
paraprofessional,
that ninth salary is not in preschool.
Um, I mean, it should be in the general
fund. That should be where it is. That's
what it should be. That's not the case
right now. We have not separated out
what is the town's mandatory
responsibility when it comes to
preschool and say, let's create a line
item in the budget for what our
mandatory expenses would be if we didn't
have any other rooms, no tuition, no
anything. So, we don't nickel and dime
back and forth in that case because when
we looked at those numbers, they would
even out. Does that make sense, Heather?
>> Yep. Thank you.
>> Okay. So, someone once asked me that,
well, if you didn't have preschool, we
wouldn't have Nope. If we didn't have
preschool, those mandatory required
services for those kids would actually
cost us $300,000 in the budget
because we would have to provide
services to those special education kids
and put it in the general fund and
special education students don't pay
tuition.
So, we would have no revenue coming in,
but we'd be providing services to those
special ed kids. So, I would actually
have to put $300,000 in the budget. And
so this works out better.
>> That that makes sense. But I thought of
another question. You were saying that
how do how do we determine what the prek
how do you determine what you charge for
prek or is it a set like by the
something?
>> So nope. So that's district by district.
Um our tuition um I actually have a list
someplace and I'll give it to you year
by year. Our tuition right now is set at
6,000 and for the time that I've been
here it's been 6,000. And that's because
our reimbursement through what used to
be called school readiness, which is now
called smart I mean early start um is
6,000 a kid. So that's our number that
we use for that figure. Um then what
happens to and we have a certain number
of slots for that grant and we have a
certain number of slots for smart start.
So we have two grants. those two grants
combined with the tuition that comes in
is $440,000
and that's why the eight salaries are
paid with the $440,000.
But um to qualify for one of those grant
slots, they have to meet a criteria
currently.
Um
for tuition we do also get andover
residents from time to time that when
they fill out their applications
um they
qualify for a reduction in tuition um
that by law we have to do and we would
reduce their tuition. Um, so
every single child does not pay the same
amount if there is financial need or if
they're special education because the
law does say if they're special
education, they don't um pay for the
service time. I'm trying to be careful
just not to say things that I'm not
supposed to say like about a specific
case. Um, so
in 2027 when the law changes, what will
happen is they will set the tuition
rate. Anybody under $100,000
will be free. It's called universal
preschool. Any family over $100,000
will have to pay 7%. That's what the
district will be allowed to charge is
7%. They're thinking of going up to
eight. So in 2027, the whole
conversation will be move. Anyways,
Heather, one of the things I want us to
be set up for is they're kind of almost
building this plane as they fly it.
Unfortunately, all of these changes.
I've been to three meetings a month on
this this whole school year. They're
talking about incentive money for
districts if, for example, they don't
have a tuition rate currently over
6,000. They're talking about incentive
rates if the empty seats are filled with
outoftowners
who would come with that universal money
by the way um like a voucher so to speak
um because there's a desert in
northeastern um Connecticut here of
availability of uh early programs. So
we're watching that. I know that there
are people that say, "Well, why don't
you just charge more in tuition, but
that's not in the general fund." So,
that extra money there, sure, there are
are other preschool related expenses
that could be put there, but in a year,
if we're not careful, we would lose the
early start funding and the smart start
funding if we change our requirements
and then we don't meet the criteria
necessary to keep funding.
Anybody else?
>> Um, I have a question, Valerie.
>> Sure.
>> On the first page of the budget, it goes
through the salaries and you had
mentioned that most of them are like
around 3% based on contracts. Um, and I
noticed that your salary is requesting
like a 11% increase. Can you speak to
that?
>> Sure. Um the board of education um we
did my contract um what two meetings
ago, three meetings ago. They will visit
it again because we realized that the uh
vote on that was not on the recording
and so they will have to do that again.
Um in my contract I am the lowest paid
superintendent. I am. Um and so when we
were renegotiating the contract, uh
there was a conversation with the board
about um it being not not where it
should be. Um we did look at contracts
in about 15 other towns to see what the
average when I say per day, I don't mean
like March 3rd. I mean if a
superintendent is a 5 day a week
superintendent each one of those days
qualifies as a 02 I am a 6. So looking
at that, if you looked at somebody
else's contract in another district and
said, "What do they make per day um per
2,
what would that equate to? What would it
look like here in Andover?" We did also
look at the
town side and we said, "Sure, not only
do we want to compare salaries to other
districts that are reasonable in size to
us, but we also want to compare it to
again that same level of commitment that
we have here in town. We are currently
hiring a town administrator. We had
contracts from the former town
administrator and we said, "Let's make
sure that our level of commitment is
fair." And when I spoke with the board,
they did also agree. And this one was
starting to write that salary. And the
reason why I say that is not just
because it's Val Bruno and Val Bruno is
the lowest paid superintendent, but also
it is fiscally responsible moving
forward. If I were to leave next year,
and I'm not. I'm staying for a while.
I'm not not old enough to retire. Um,
they they would have to replace that,
Louise. They would absolutely have to
replace that. And to be able to replace
it, they have to have a salary that's
not thousands of dollars off from what
the average salary is. You know, we're
hiring a town administrator now. And if
Eric's contract when he was here was
103,000, there isn't anybody that is
going to come into that position for 80.
A town administrator with experience is
going to come in and they're going to
expect a range. This is still the bottom
of that range. And so
>> when they look when they looked at that
comparing it being the lowest, did they
also look at you being three days a
week?
>> Yes.
>> Versus five, they did. Okay.
>> Yes. That's what I mean, Louise. That's
a great question. But that's that's what
they look at. They say if there's a a
full-time superintendent, you know, um
makes 210,000,
what would that look like pr-rated to
three days a week? And they did go
through many towns and say, "What would
that look like?" And this is what she
would make if we used the same formula
as ram, as Coventry, as hein as marble.
And they went through those. And this is
still significantly lower. It just so
happens that it was way lower before.
And when we do a contract and you do a
three-year contract, you're looking at
comparability. Robert,
>> that was my next question about this is
a three-year deal. So,
>> yes,
>> your last contract was what? 22 to 25?
>> No, it hasn't expired yet. The contract
that I'm in right now 90 that expires
June 30th.
>> Uh 23 to 26 then.
>> Right. Okay. But because we had talked
about myself and the board the next time
we did a contract trying to not make it
equal to the other districts, but trying
to kind of bridge that gap a little bit.
That's why we really had to talk about
it in October because what if the seven
board members um their idea of bridging
the gap wasn't the same. And so we had
to talk about that pre-doing the budget
because we had to know was it going to
be 100 110 what was it going to be? Um
and so it was important to me that we do
that prior to this budget so that I knew
what the seven members um felt
comfortable approving to start bridging
that gap. Any
other questions?
>> Is that comparison um between salaries
and towns?
>> I'm sorry, who's speaking?
>> This is Anna. I just Is that comparison?
>> I'm sorry.
>> Uh hang on a minute. Um so public speak,
I mean with respect to
>> I can ask one of the members to ask then
that's fine.
>> Yeah, that's no worries and we can put
it in chat or maybe uh or what have you.
I I just we don't have a vehicle for
uh doing
>> Bob. Can I ask?
>> Yeah. Go ahead. Can
>> is that comparison made public? Do we
all know?
>> No, because I can give you those numbers
publicly. Um that's not a problem. But
the problem with putting the town next
to it, Kim, is then I am sharing without
w without disrespect to colleagues, I am
sharing their names in essence if I'm
sharing the names of the town. So the
board of education did get them. But I
would say that if somebody is interested
to go to the websites of all the towns
and look them up individually. I'm not
comfortable saying this is Tom's salary,
this is Colin's salary, this is Holly's
salary. Um, I did that for the board of
ed in in in our executive session, but
when you're talking about somebody
else's contracts, um, I'm not
comfortable putting them on the spot
that way.
>> So,
>> I mean, that said, it is it is public,
right? I mean, ultimately, you can find
it. So
>> that's why I'm saying if somebody wants
to look at a contract, they can go to
any
>> website
>> for a town near us, look at the
superintendent contract.
>> Yep.
>> Yeah.
>> I guess the issue the issue is, of
course, if it was nicely aggregated in
one spot, it's easier to look at, but
>> it is.
>> It is. You also all have full-time jobs
as well. So
>> yeah, it's it can be tough. Um, so
understandable. Um
yeah, that that would be helpful. Um if
we could get
Yeah, but you can in fact Google around.
I mean, I I did this with the looking at
various town charters and it took me
hours. So, you know, it's it's a time
investment is all it is. Um
>> I would I would say anybody that's
interested look at the towns that just
border us and that would give you a lot
of information. The average
>> commentary, Columbia, Hebrin, Bolton,
>> Rob.
>> Yeah,
>> I don't mean to interrupt you.
>> No, go ahead.
>> Hi. Can we please get the specific list
of the towns?
>> Do you mind?
>> The specific list of the towns that were
used for the
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Actually, that that's
really
>> we just could we just get like the
towns. We don't We can look it up
ourselves, but like
>> Yeah. Yeah. We don't need That seems
fair. We're not looking for anything
confidential, private,
>> protected. We're just looking for the
names of the towns.
>> Yep. That's That's
>> I really appreciate that, Rob. Thank
you.
>> Seems reasonable. Yes, agreed.
>> You know, because I mean, it's easy to
look around and just say geographically,
right? It's Coventry, it's Columbia,
it's Hebrin, it's maybe it's Marorrow,
maybe Bolton.
>> Perfect.
>> You know, right? But what is it exactly?
What are the what are the comps? Because
the other thing is, and we've, and I
know I've talked about this with Valerie
before, in terms of budgeting and and
school costs and everything like that,
is that sometimes, yeah, geographical
proximity is one thing. Uh, on the other
hand, you have comparable towns which
may not border you, right? Our town is
3,300 people. We have a certain level of
what have you. And then you might have a
town that borders us but it's three
times our size or whatever and it may
not be the same. So that's why you know
some we have um Val was talking about it
earlier. I forget the acronym but our
like
our town group for a particular
calculation might be different because
it's trying to calculate based on the
size of town you know and sophistication
of the town and it may not be our
immediate borders. So that's that's one
example.
>> So I could give you the names of the
towns. I just pulled this off my desk
since I'm still in my office. Hein,
Coventry, Lebanon, Colchester, Bosra,
Salem, um, Ram, uh, Franklin, and
Marboro. And I will mix up I will mix up
these numbers for you so that you don't
have the name of the person. But what
they did was they took the 0.2 two rate
the board of ed um and I assisted in
helping um you know with the names of
the towns that were comparable. If you
took the tw rate, multiplied it by three
since I'm 6. Um, my salary would be in
any of those towns, um, this was the
comparable list that they had. 150, 126,
115, 111, 117, 153, 125,
uh, 17, and 107. So those are the
comparables for all of those town towns
in different order. So that was what
they looked at. That's what the board
looked at.
>> I I think what would help uh Val if
after the meeting if you have a chance
to just email us the list of towns
because you know you just rattled them
off and that's great and I've already
lost half of them. So uh Bos, you know
these things. Um if you could just get
us that later that would be helpful. So
people can just go look it up and make
themselves comfortable.
>> Nick, do you have a question?
>> No. Oh, no question. Thank you.
>> Okay. He He turned his thing on. I
thought he was like, "Wait, call on me."
>> No, I'm I'm going through. I'm trying to
keep uh everybody on the side here. Uh
make sure I'm not missing anything. So,
by all means, speak up, people, if I'm
not seeing you. Um
so,
>> anything else?
I guess the only other question that
occurs to me is,
you know,
how much of this if you looked at this
from the perspective of
just the the mandated increases,
the health care costs, like you can't
really do anything about all the stuff.
you can't really do anything about,
you know, are we still in the high
single digits? Like where are we in
terms of where would you be if you said
to yourself, well, for by some miracle I
I I don't need the extra teacher or I I
don't need uh this or that. Is is there
anything in here? And also and the other
question I guess I would have is and I
think people know about this you know
you may be able to tap into at least for
one year
your what remains it's not a lot of
money but there's some money in the 2%
non-lapsing. If you were to do that what
would this come down to do you think off
the top of your head? I know I'm not
asking you to do all the math right now.
>> She's still sharing her screen just so
you know.
>> Yep. Okay. Because I know she's typing
something in. I don't want her to.
>> No, I I knew. I knew.
>> Okay. I just wanted to make sure that
you didn't Google search something
there, Heather, and you went, "I didn't
know they could see that." Um, just
giving you a heads up. Um, so here's the
thing, Rob. Those of you who have
watched my budgets for six years know
that um I I don't do a budget like some
superintendent do where I say in the
end, I could cut that. I'm just going to
put it in so that it's cutable. I don't
believe in that personally. So if you're
saying what expenditures are in here do
you not need none of them. There are
none because even I know even that sixth
grade teacher
like it or not if someone says we think
you should just leave 26 kids in there.
I will need a paraprofessional then
which means that that class that teacher
salary turns into a Paris salary. So, I
still need it.
And so,
then we mentioned the 2% non-lapsing
account.
The issue with that is even if there's
$10,000 left at the end of a year, we
put that in the 2% and it starts to
build just like the funds do for the
fire truck, for the roads, for the level
of commitment that everybody knows needs
to be done when we spend a million
dollars funding those funds every year.
For us, the only thing we have is the
2%. And last year, we asked for eight
and a half. We did not get eight and a
half, but those expenditures did not go
away. So, we're three and a half in the
hole that we're going to have to take
out of that 2% at the end of this year.
I promise you, we will not end this year
with a surplus. We will end this year
behind, which means we're already going
to have to take out of that 2%.
Because we had that fourth and fifth
grade teacher last year and they were
not funded at a 5% increase. So Rob, I
hear you. And on any other year, if I
didn't know that I was already going to
dip into the 2% non-lapsing account for
this year, I'd say you're right. There's
money in there and at the end of this
year, we're going to have a surplus and
we'll have more money in there. That's
not true. So if we use what's left in
there and we have nothing to put in
there this year because we're in the
hole. And then you say, "If there's
anything left in there, use it next
year." Val, I'm already two years
without being able to refund it. And the
2% non-lapsing account is not an account
that the town funds at budget season.
>> So that's the appeal of
>> So that account that fund would be empty
and then not there for three years.
>> So we would have zero.
>> No, look, anything you pull from that is
a oneshot deal. I understand it.
>> Right. And these expenditures are not
oneshot deal expenditures.
So it'd be different if I was saying to
you, well, what I have in here, Rob, is
a oneshot deal where I need this one
thing for a kid that's in sixth grade
and we've got to buy a, you know, a
$50,000 wheelchair for them and to use
for a year. Well, that would be a
one-year expense. None of these are
one-year expenses. That's why I say we
started the year three and a half in the
hole because having to hire the fourth
and fifth grade teacher last year was
not a oneshot deal. They're now in the
budget. So that's why it's a tough year
and I know that. Um but these are not
oneshot deal expenditures and they're
required expenditures. There isn't
anything in here I would have already
taken it out. There isn't anything in
here that I could say we can live
without that.
We've already pulled out those things.
>> May I ask a question?
>> Go ahead.
>> It's Louise again. Okay. Um, with the
solar panels, um, when the company sold
those to you, did they anticipate some
sort of a They generally do some sort of
a savings for you coming up each year?
>> Yes, Louise, great question. I don't
know if you remember from our meeting
and they didn't sell them to us.
Remember, we're doing that Eversource
program. So, there's no charge for them
in our budget. So, they originally had
anticipated we'd have about a $32,000
um savings. And then, if you remember
right, Louise, um the town decided that
we were not going to utilize the same
number of solar panels because there was
a question about whether or not in the
future one of the roofs would
potentially need um to have work on it.
So, we reduced those solar panels in
half and now the estimation is
potentially
7 to 8,000, but again, it's not even up
and running yet. So, we have no data to
go on to say, is it really going to be a
7 to 8,000? Maybe next year we're having
a different conversation and we're
saying they were spot on. It was exactly
8,000, but we have zero data and they're
not even up and running yet. And
>> so that's not that's not um incorporated
into this budget then the savings.
>> Well, it it is Louise in the sense that
we did not increase our utilities at
all.
>> We kept them exactly the same in this
budget because to your point, we're
going to keep our fingers and our toes
crossed that there is some savings to
it. We just don't know what it is yet.
So that's where we said we're going to
hold our breath and keep those lines
exactly even. And we do
>> you're you're hoping for like a 10%
decrease if you're lucky.
>> Yes.
>> If we're lucky.
>> Yes. But we'll know more uh this time
next year. Obviously, we'll know more. I
guess I would say, you know, just from
my own personal experience with solar, I
mean, I did my own calculations because
I don't trust contractors, but um mine
worked out really really astoundingly
well. They were bang on. So, if you're,
you know, I I I I think we all agree
you're going to get some savings. It's
just a question of is it five,
>> is it seven,
>> right?
>> You know, is it in there? um you're
going to get some savings, but when do
you know when it's going to go live?
>> Well, if we didn't have mother nature
snowing on us um continuously and we
could get to the roof, Rob, um she'd be
up and running by now. But
>> I still have snow sliding off my panels
as we speak. Um but no, yeah, I mean, my
system went live in July, which was in
the, you know, kind of the middle of the
year, but hopefully you guys are up and
running in April or something. It'll be
better.
Is there a date for when Eversource is
going to put their meter in for the
solar panels?
>> Um, so they're actually they're almost
done with all of that now. They were
here today, as a matter of fact, to try
to clear the snow. They've already done
their two Was that Kim? Kim, they've
already done their two shutdowns, too,
so that they could check and make sure
all the electrical worked. We did the
last shutdown on the last Monday that we
had off for the holiday. So, they're
there. Now it's just mother nature
cooperating so that we can we can go on
board. Um and so that's why to Rob's
point I actually think it will be April.
Um but they're they had been moving
along before the snowstorm. Kim,
>> by them you mean Eversource or the solar
company?
>> The two of them are working obviously uh
the contractor is the solar company but
there is an Eversource
>> part. The metering Eversource has to do
the metering.
>> Correct. Correct. And they're very
strict about um their
>> Yes. So, I want to circle back to the
psychologist.
>> Is it Am I correct in understanding that
the $90,000 that we're going to pay that
includes the benefits for the
psychologist as well?
>> The No, the 101 line is their salary.
And Kim, I not that I would because
we've had this conversation before. I
couldn't answer you right now to tell
you if that person even had benefits. I
I don't know the answer to that in this
moment in time. Um it I don't um but no
person's benefits are in the 101's
because the 101's 002101 those are their
salaries.
>> Okay. Okay. Thank you Valerie. And I I
want to circle back to the the HVAC. Um
do you anticipate any HVAC improvements
in the school, air conditioning,
heating, etc. in this coming year?
because it seems like there's been a lot
of work done on that in the school in
the last year.
>> So to which to which you say HVAC so the
the air conditioning
>> air conditioning
>> right the the air conditioning is that's
not on our radar right now. Those um
were installed and they were um the
individual ones in the classrooms were
installed with COVID money in 21 to 22.
So, that's not, you know, we have
regular repair and maintenance, uh, I
mean, regular maintenance contracts on
those, but we haven't had a lot of
anything with that. The, um, the heating
system, regular ongoing maintenance, but
we have had a few. There's a pump in the
the pump room down there that had, um, a
fitting and pipe that need to be fixed.
The Skidmore pump um, that's going to be
about 3,000
um, to fix that. that's already, you
know, in the works there. There are a
few smaller things, Kim, um, that that
we're working on there. We are
definitely going to have to make sure
that if there is that small leak in that
pipe that that's fixed for the 3000 that
package because part of the Eversource
incentive program is going to be
wrapping the pipes for more energy
efficiency. So, we do need to make sure
that that's done before the pipes are
wrapped. Um, we're about 18 months out.
So what the head custodian Jod and I
will be working on in the coming 12
months is looking at exactly and we've
gotten one you know in in mind that
we're waiting for a quote now on um what
would need to be done with the the
boilers that is probably 18 months out.
So we could see that as a uh a capital
conversation this time next year for the
budget um but not this year.
Rob.
>> Oh, I'm just uh just seeing if anybody
else on the board has further questions.
>> I just have one more quick question. Um
>> how how many staff do you have at the
school right now?
>> Um well, that one you're throwing me.
So, we have just under 50. Um, so don't
quote me if it's 48 or 52, but I know
that when we we have to put things in
mailboxes, it's 50. So that would
include uh everybody that works here. So
it's 50.
>> So between 50 and 52.
>> No, between 45 and 52, Kim, because if I
get that number wrong, someone's going
to try to hold me to that. Um, but
roughly 50. Yes.
All right. Um,
>> I had a quick question, I think. Go
right ahead, Heather. Heather,
>> is there and this might just be because
I'm new I'm new on this board. Is there
a place to see like all the
I guess the revenue like the grants that
we've had or the board of ed has had but
now doesn't have or just kind of
something a summary. So the board of
finance receives and then it's also
attached to our um monthly uh financials
for the board of education. They see the
um the grants that we have um
>> in that sorry that's that monthly
summary that we get on the board of
finance meeting. Okay.
>> Yes. And what you see on there, Heather,
when she does it, because um we had
changed about a year ago. I think it was
um might have been Joanne actually that
um you know, had asked for that when she
was on the board of finance. That
actually also lists and so does our
financial. It lists what came in that
month for that grant. So if if an if a
Title 4 grant is a $10,000 grant for the
year, what you might see that month in
revenue coming in might say 2600. It
doesn't mean that's the whole grant. It
means that's what came in that month to
offset whatever was the expenses that
that she put in for for reimbursement
because remember all of our grants are
reimbursement grants. So we spend the
money first, we turn in the receipts and
then they reimburse us. So, um, yeah, if
if you look, Heather, on the financials,
you'll see them. And again, next year,
what you'll expect to see are our title
grants, which the salaries that are
covered out of our title grants are not
in the general fund. They're reflected
in the title grants. IDEIDA, which is
special education, so it can only be
used for special education costs. Title
and special ed, uh, title and IDA grants
are what we can expect for next year.
Separate from the general fund, you also
see that number on the bottom. Um
revenue to the preschool program is
tuition, smart start, and um early
start.
>> You know, it occurs to me, Val, it might
be useful from the perspective of
explaining things to the public if we
had an aggregate of okay, look, last
fiscal year we got a total of this much
in grant money. Forget the preschool.
I'm talking about pre I'm talking about
K through six.
Um and then this year we're looking at
receiving this much because you know you
as you walked us through your your
budget summary you mentioned we lost
some grant money. There are some people
like the I think it was one of them was
the psychologist where we lost a
significant chunk of money that is no
longer funding a salary. And that might
be helpful
to have that data just to say you know
to have it aggregated. You don't have to
I don't know if we have to have chapter
verse but we had this much now we're
anticipating this much and there's your
gap and that helps explain
one of the big cost drivers in this
budget. One of the cost drivers in this
budget. So that one might be a useful
infographic to try to create and and
maybe we can work on that.
That's one of the reasons why we did
keep stressing the loss of that grant
because I didn't want people to think
that um you know it was all of a sudden
we needed a psychologist. We always had
a psychologist just we'd been keeping it
out of the budget because we had that
grant. Um I will talk to Jod about
making sure that she can fill you guys
in on those lost grants. Um, just
understand title grants, title one,
title four and um, idea grants are
fairly consistent, which is why I say we
we know that the amounts may change a
little bit. We might lose a couple
hundred bucks, a thousand bucks,
whatever, but for the most part, those
are consistent for us in budgeting. So,
us taking somebody out of the general
fund and keeping them in idea or title
is not as big a risk. the mental health
grant that we used for the school
psychologist for example those are
grants that pop up um in egrant
management system it's what's called
entitlement grants just like entitlement
programs on a government level Medicaid
social security those sorts of things
and then there's competitive grants and
the competitive grants are the ones that
pop up that you have to apply for that
you don't know if you're going to get it
and then when you get it you're like
great but when that's gone it's gone
it's one and done and Those might come
that those might come mid year.
>> They absolutely
uh come at odd times because the state
legislature has to approve money to put
aside for something or the federal
government approves money to put aside
for something and it almost never
coincides with July 1. And so those
competitive grants um rarely rarely um
you know have a specific time frame, a
specific time period. But yes, I will
ask Jod to come up with um the short
list of the grants that were lost for
you guys so that you can see it and they
would include the mental health grant.
>> I think that would be helpful honestly.
And you know, I think everybody here
should understand the uncertainty that
is involved with grants that might show
up 3 months from now that we don't know
about. I mean that
>> just like postco Rob postco we got lots
more. I did all the air all the air
conditioning in the building without a
capital budget because I had COVID
relief money.
>> HVAC for CO makes total sense. Um no
that that makes sense. I I just I am
thinking ahead to a budget hearing. I'm
thinking ahead to town meeting. I'm
thinking of how to explain all of this
to our town people. So, it just occurs
to me that helping people understand how
the grants work a little bit better. You
know, a lot of it's under the hood and I
think that to the extent that we can
explain it a little better, it might
help. So yeah, whatever you and Jody can
come up with, I think would be would be
helpful there.
>> Yep.
>> Do we have um other members of the board
with questions on line items here?
Anything in specific? I mean, I look at
the benefit totals and what I see is
18%. And I'm like, okay, well 15% of
that is probably the healthcare and then
the rest is your salary increase. I
mean, I don't know if I have anything
really to because
>> no in benefits.
>> Salary doesn't doesn't benefits key off
of salaries. So if you increase your
salary 3% you get decrease.
>> No
>> no no there are other benefits um
contractual benefits um
>> oh okay
>> like life insurance if somebody has
another benefit that's in there you know
those sorts of things um
>> visibility whatnot.
>> Yep.
>> Any of those longevity those sorts of
things that are in people's contracts
which is why it just says benefits. So
it it if a salary increases, it doesn't
automatically
>> kick over to because this is in
retirement. I'm thinking I'm thinking
private sector. I'm thinking about if I
get a raise, my benefits go up because
it's my everything keys off my salary.
Um this is
>> that would be that would be the one that
I told you is down there in pension for
the non-serve,
>> right? The non-served pension,
>> right? their municipal pension would
change because their salary goes up. But
remember, back to teachers and admin and
myself, we're all in teachers
retirement. Um, which means that um, uh,
our TRB is paid out of our paychecks.
>> So, nope. That that doesn't, you know,
if a teacher goes from making 80,000 to
90,000, there is no increase in benefits
for that teacher because they pay their
own TRB. So they'll be charged more TRB,
but it comes out of their paycheck,
>> right? So just looking at at on this
page here, the the teachers salaries and
everything like that, you know, looking
at the increases, the significant
increases here are the the obviously the
overall, but that's contractual. The
speech teacher, the library,
um, and obviously the psychologist,
we've talked about the psychologist
already, so don't worry about that. So
the the library and the speech was that
were were either of those affected by
grants?
>> The library was because one of her four
days had been in a grant.
>> I see.
>> Um so that's why that one was kicked
back um in there. The speech, however,
the speech teacher,
let me see how I can say this. The
speech teacher
when there was less need with the
students
was split between two districts
>> and so every cost associated with her
was split by two districts. So that was
a huge savings to us because if you are
splitting a person, you're splitting all
of their expenses. If they take
insurance, you're splitting that as
well.
We've been kind of milking um the
schedule in terms of
we knew we had too many days that we
needed,
but we weren't quite at full-time in the
past before. And so our split went from
5050,
which was two and a half days and two
and a half days to then three days here.
Like we've been inching that up, Rob, as
the need goes up because the other thing
we do with our special education
population is I work with the special ed
director and pre putting out this
budget, we go through everything. How
many kids require speech services per
their IEP? How many hours do they
require? How many direct service hours
and nonirect PPTs, meetings like that?
So, you need a speech teacher, how many
hours a week? And then we move to OT and
PT and mandated hours for the
psychologist. We do all of that when
we're putting together a budget to make
sure that all the students needs. Now,
anybody who has had a child that was
special ed or worked in the special ed
field like me, that gets thrown into the
wind sometimes during the year because
when you have a meeting on a special
education student, it could go well and
someone could say, "Oh, they actually
don't need five hours anymore uh a
month. They're going to need three." or
it could go the other way where they say
we now need five hours a month and it
used to be three. So, um
there is volatility in those lines as
well, but for the most part based on the
information that we have when putting
this budget together, based on the
number of special education students,
these are real needs.
>> The short short answer is you're taking
your speech up from two and a half to
three, right? No, they were already at
three this year.
>> Oh, okay.
>> And they are moving up.
>> Oh, okay. Even further. Okay.
>> And so that's that's that's that's an
issue. Again, something that we put off
for as long as possible. Um definitely
that had been reduced um I believe in
2018.
they had reduced it um uh back then a
little bit and then a little bit more in
um when we had less students and it's
just been climbing up as the number of
students
>> I'm sure postco you need speech help y
that makes sense
>> okay
>> Rob I have two more quick questions
sorry
>> go ahead Kim please go right ahead
>> um Valerie do we have any out of town
children in our K through six schools
school
>> this school year. Yes.
>> Okay. And and are they paying the agreed
tuition that is in your policies?
>> They have an agreement to pay the agreed
upon tuition at the start of this school
year.
They won't be out of town
for the whole rest of this school year.
which is why next year they will not be
considered an out of town. They will be
considered an in town.
>> Okay. So, they're not paying the agreed
upon tuition.
>> That's not what I said.
>> I guess my next question said
>> that's not what I said.
>> I'm not sure.
>> Okay. Um my next question when you
>> Wait, wait, wait, wait.
>> What is the agreed upon tuition? Like
>> Well, there's a certain amount of money
that we
and over charges for kids who come from
out of town.
>> Correct.
>> Is this Are we We're talking K through
six here.
>> Yeah, K through six.
>> So, this is like the conversation we had
with Colin about, you know, Colombia
kids paying 15,000 or rather Colombia
paying 15,000 a kid to go to RAM.
>> Okay.
>> Yes. And Rob, perfect example. If that
child,
>> I'm going to use your example because I
don't want us to get personal. Um, if
that child uh
becomes an Andover resident in March,
Colombia is not going to pay
the agreed upon April, May, June to
Colin because then they would be a
resident of Hebrin, Andover or Marorrow.
Follow me?
The money that's being paid is because
they are a Colia resident. If they were
a full-fledged Ram student, there would
be no tuition
>> because they pay their town taxes.
>> Correct.
>> Gotcha.
>> So, the idea would be that if we have
people right now that are in the process
of moving into Andover,
>> it happens. Or or Yes, it happens all
the time. I can tell you three years
ago,
>> we had a preschooler that paid out of
town uh who paid tuition. they were out
of town and they then paid tuition for
September, October, November, and
December until a house was purchased and
then they stopped paying kindergarten
tuition because they became an Andover
resident. So yes, that happens all the
time.
>> Okay,
>> we currently only have one family that
falls under that category,
>> right? And so that idea is basically a
transitional phase essentially like no
if you're
>> do we ever have do we ever have somebody
who for whatever reason K through six um
the whole year they're out oftowner like
and they don't is it all transitional
like that or is it situation where
somebody for whatever reason um attends
the school all year like that? Um
>> I mean again hypothetic I don't want you
to get into any
>> specific no I I think I can answer it
without anything private but say it
again. So
>> so if you have a situation so we have a
situation right now where we have a
student or what have you that is out of
town now but we anticipate them you know
moving in.
>> No they were charged tuition until they
moved in
>> and they moved they get charged tuition
on prided essentially on a prated basis
right until they moved in. Um, not pro
prate is the wrong word, but I know what
you're saying. They pay partial
payments. Y.
>> So, has there been a situation ever
where we've had a student that was out
of town and paying tuition an entire
school year? Is that a thing that we do?
>> Absolutely. We've had um before I got
here, we had staff members that um
worked here and wanted their children to
go to school here. Like that's why
there's a tuition rate and they paid for
their children to go before I was here.
They paid for their their children to go
here.
>> Oh, okay. Okay. Okay.
>> That's every town and that's why there
has to be a board of ed policy that
determines what that tuition rate is.
>> I see.
Is that is that a flat is that a flat
rate or is there an adjustment for like,
>> you know, family income or anything like
that? Once a year the board has to
redetermine um what that rate is by
policy but then that's it you know um
you know we don't we don't
>> so this is along the lines of RAM
deciding okay it's 15 grand if you want
a Columbia student to come to our school
>> correct
>> they pick that
>> and they have a policy rate where you
could have a Mansfield kid that'll say
you know what I want my kid to go to RAM
and there's a policy in RAM's board of
ed policies that say Well, we're not one
of your sending schools, so the parents
are going to have to pay that instead of
the school district. Colia Colia pays
the 15,000 for their Colombia kids
because Ram is a choice school,
>> but if a kid in Mansfield wants to go to
Ram, the family would have to pay,
>> okay?
>> Because it's not a choice school for
Mansfield.
>> And and so we have a policy that says
>> every school district does.
>> Okay.
>> Correct. All right.
>> I appreciate that answer. I just have
one more quick question. So, in 2023 24,
we increased our prek program by two
more classrooms. And I'm just curious,
not on a bigger level, did we have to
increase our insurance policy for the
town or the school due to a much bigger
group of children? That's just a
something that I was personally thinking
of myself and would like to know. I know
we have a massive insurance policy,
>> but I'm just curious, how did that
affect that? Because that's a lot of
kids.
>> It it doesn't affect it. Okay. And I can
tell you that since that time, our four
preschools and our two kindergartens
have the fantastic accolade of being
NYAK accredited classrooms, which means
that we had um an even higher than OEC.
Um department come in and um those six
classrooms were scrutinized. Our
policies and procedures were
scrutinized. our handbook, our
everything was scrutinized for those six
classrooms and we scored above 97 and 98
in those six classrooms. So, I can tell
you personally, we were very proud of
that. Our six classrooms have everything
they need to for compliance and then
some, which is why our four preschools
are considered so um sought after. Rob.
>> Yeah. So, I mean, just on the insurance
angle, just so I I understand it better,
you know, I'm an insurance guy, you know
that, but I'm not this kind of insurance
guy. So, bear with me. Um, you know, you
have this situation where I'm sure the
the school has a variety of insurance
policies. You have commercial general,
well, not commercial, but general
liability. I'm sure you have work comp
for your employees. You have this and
that and the other. So, are those kind
of in in one pool? Uh, or I mean, I
assume you're not disagregating this to
to literally like every grade. That
would be crazy.
>> No.
>> Um, but
>> yeah, I mean, I guess what it boils down
to, and this is as sort of an old school
insurance guy, it it would be tricky to
figure this out, but you'd have to think
about it how the policyy's rated. We we
don't pay based on the number of
classrooms that we have.
>> Yeah.
>> You don't you don't pay based on headc
count.
>> No, there isn't a policy that we pay
based on
>> So that's what it boils down to. So, you
know, for those of you who are not in
insurance, there are various ways of
rating an insurance policy.
And I've seen many of them uh in my time
in insurance. And a lot of the times
what I'm doing is going back and looking
at historical insurance policies and
trying to figure out what in the world
we were trying to do 30 years ago. And
one of the things that we look at is the
ratings page. On the ratings page, you
can rate things on payroll. You can rate
them on square footage. You can rate
there's like a million different ways
you can rate an insurance policy and
decide the premium. And if it's not
based on headcount in terms of the
number of students,
you know, maybe it's if it's based on
remuneration, which is salary by the
way. Um that's
then yeah, sort of kind of it it
involves how many kids you had in the
school because obviously if you have
more kids in the school, you have more
employees. But there may if they're
rating it off of other things, then it's
kind of irrelevant how many kids you
have in a given classroom.
So that's what I would go to. And I I
have to be careful here because I work
for insurance companies. So I don't want
to get too closely involved in these
discussions. It's not my I'd have to
recuse if we got too close to it. But
basically, just for those as
anformational matter, the way that
underwriters go about this, it can be
done a variety of different ways, and it
may or may not be uh have anything to do
with the number of children in a given
classroom or a given program. I totally
agree with you. I wanted to ask the
question, Rob. Thank you, Valerie.
>> Oh, yeah. You're welcome. Kib, by the
way, no, no problem at all. I'm just
trying to be informational. I'm just
trying to help,
>> you know, as somebody who actually
>> knows like this much about insurance.
>> And I'm glad that I don't have to worry
about any insurance based on the number
of kids in classrooms. So, no, don't
give anybody any ideas, Kim. We don't
have to do that.
>> Down this rabbit hole too many times.
I'm not an underwriter. Thank you.
>> I don't need to do it. Uh, I wish I, you
know, but every once in a while I have
to try to figure out what an underwriter
was thinking and it's always um a great
deal of fun. By which I mean not at all.
Anyway, um, okay. So, Kim, are you set
or did you have more?
>> Bob, I'm all set. Thank you very much.
>> You're all set. Um, Heather, are you
good?
>> Um,
I think so. I had a I I was reading back
through one of the emails that we got
and I had a question. um about how the
budget's presented like are we supposed
to be able to see like the the actual
and then what they've what has been
spent so far this year. Do you remember
that email we got from someone on our
board?
>> Oh, about which columns and and um um
>> yes, we adhere we adhere to the five
columns. Um but the only difference is
the last year's actuals aren't done yet
because the audit's not done.
>> Yeah. The tricky bit here and um I've
been and and this is something that I
recognize as a difficulty across the
board is that so everybody understands
when we do an audit in theory in an
ideal world right the fiscal year closes
January not January June 30th
and between that time and the end of the
year in theory if we were had all
everything was firing on all cylinders
and we had all our ducks in a row. We'd
have our audit done before we started
the budget process and we would know
everything up to June 30th, 2025.
Unfortunately, and as has been the case
many years in this town, we are not
done.
We have sometimes been a full calendar
year behind. We have been chipping away
at that and getting better and better,
but we're not there yet. So the the
budget year that ends
2025 2425 is not audited yet. We can
have ballpark figures, but we do not
know we don't have an audited figure yet
for that that last budget year. Not the
budget year we're in now and still
haven't finished, but rather the one one
back, which gets frustrating when you
want to look back and try to figure out
what's going on. It means that you don't
have accurate to the penny information
for even seven months ago.
Uh this is something when I ask Lisa for
instance, hey Lisa, what what's going on
with all our different town funds? I
recognize that she's in dealing she's
dealing with the same problem. So just
so everybody understands that's one of
the constraints we're under. But I mean,
we also have to try to make decisions
regardless. And and that's the tricky
bit. We have to be able to maybe find a
ballpark that we can live with and and
make our best guess because at some
point we have to make decisions and we
may not have I don't think that audit's
going to be done tomorrow.
I mean, I don't remember about when we
finished last year, like the budget, the
last audit. Well, you know that six
months ago, we were still doing the
graduate plan. So, um four four months
ago,
>> um we were still
>> I mean, it was done but for the plan to
be fair, right? We had our numbers
basically, but we had to do the plan.
Right.
>> Right. So, it was just before that.
>> Right. But it was it was definitely
after we passed our budget, wasn't it?
Right around when we passed our budget.
>> Yes. Right.
>> Yeah. So, ideally, guys, we'd be four or
five months ahead of that. And we
haven't been there in
Oh, I I can't even tell you how long. Uh
we've had a lot of problems with audits
over the years.
>> Just so you know, it's 8:02.
Um and in 8:02, Rob, in the um uh town
charter, that's where it tells Jodie
what her five columns need to be. the
actual which we don't have. The actual
itemized expenditures
um is one of them. The original uh
budget allocation
um the estimated expenditures to be
incurred for the next year which is the
26 27 um in there. So yeah, the only
thing that's missing is the um actuals
that we don't have yet. I mean, I guess
I guess in theory, the best that could
be done is you could put it in actuals,
but they're not audited actuals.
>> They're not actuals then, right?
>> They they'd be gueststim they everybody
would have to understand that they're
guesstimates. That's the answer. I mean,
for instance, Lisa is trying to do that
for us right now with our current budget
year where she's got a column in her
chart, and I think I hope everybody
understands that that's her best
understanding, not an audited figure.
Um, you know, but she's got a column
there that goes from June 30, well, July
1st rather, 2025 to present to, no,
sorry, to the end of January. and that's
her going through everything and and
doing her best. But it's nobody should
take that as gospel truth because the
reality is until it's audited
it could be off by by a little bit. Not
that I no disrespect to Lisa. So that's
that I guess is the question whether we
>> Yeah.
>> whether it's realistic or reasonable to
ask for
the unodudited info. I guess
>> I think that's dangerous. Um I mean at a
board of ed meeting they can see by
looking at the last they can go back to
our uh June board of ed packet and they
will see where we ended the year out.
>> Yeah,
>> I think it's dangerous to put them in as
quote actuals. They are not audited. But
I would say that if somebody is
interested absolutely look at the last
financials from June and look at them uh
you know they would have come at the
July meeting and that will show you
where we ended. So if somebody is
interested in saying well how much did
they spend last year before the audit
comes out. It's the the June financials
and those are online. So
it's yeah eventually we'll get the audit
earlier.
Yeah, eventually we will get there. I I
swear at some point during my tenure, we
will get there. No, it's also it's also
the issue and we will always deal with
this is there will always be some
difference between the audited figure
because it's the end of June
and even if we get it done real quick
there's going to be at least four months
right of the new budget going into place
and expenditures happening and
everything right when we're looking at
for instance on the town side fund
balances
the thing that I keep trying to focus on
uh because if you get a snapshot, the
audits a snapshot at the end of the
fiscal year
>> um
>> for this for the school Rob it's
actually a little bit more accurate and
different because we're a separate
account. Yeah.
>> So when July rolls around,
>> yeah,
>> when when we do the reconciliation for
June and pay all the bills,
>> July one is our account is empty except
any outstanding June bills that haven't
gone through yet. As well as if it was a
year that had a surplus, that's in
there. It's not going to be the case
this year, but so we know.
>> And again, you're also just doing an ops
budget. We're on the town side. You
know, I keep thinking and it's important
not to get these confused when I think
about our various town funds. That's
capital stuff and that's not something
you have going on.
>> We don't have that in that account.
Right.
>> That's right. So,
>> well, you have you have your capital
account, which is a whole another
discussion.
>> That's on the town side. Yeah, that's on
the town.
>> Whole another discussion. But, um,
>> anything else from you, Rob?
>> Does anybody else have questions about,
you know, the kind of the line items and
and everything that Valerie walked us
through? Does anybody else have anything
they want to bring up, discuss?
Board members,
now is your time.
>> Um, I just would like to say that I do
think it would be good if we got the
actuals in that um budget. We asked for
it on the town side and as close as we
can get for the board of education.
>> Again, I will gladly re um bring up um
the financials from June. That's the
best that we can do is to show you our
June financials where we ended because
when I show you those you will see as of
June 30th what was spent in each line
item.
>> But so from from there till now
>> right
>> is that's the I mean I think that's what
Kim is
>> correct
>> talking about. That's what I'm asking
for Rob
>> this year so far. No, we've never done
that during budget season. We've never
said, "Well, let's show you the current
fiscal year and where you are in
spending." And if you want to see that,
that is monthly at the board meeting as
well. But that's that wouldn't be
accurate for us. It wouldn't be accurate
for us.
>> If we went looked at the last finish,
let me finish. The reason why it
wouldn't be accurate for us is, for
example, if right now somebody says,
"But Valerie, you've only spent 50% of
your teacher salary line item. Um,
you're going to have a surplus." No, I'm
not because I run five payrolls
on the last week of school.
>> So that's why Rob, that's not accurate.
It's never done that way with a school
district for that reason. It's not
accurate. We have a heavy set of
expenditures that occur April, May, and
June. And the town only pays us our
allowance until April. So we don't get
any money toward those expenditures in
May and June. So it would be absolutely
a a moot number. The number that would
help Kim would be and because we don't
have the audit yet would be to look at
June's financials and say as of June
30th what had the school spent on
everything. That would be a number that
would be worthwhile for a Kim. And I'm
happy to pull the June financials and
send them to you guys. Again,
>> the only the only disagreement I have
with you about it's minor is this on the
town side. When we look at
year-to- date expenditure information,
it is understood and we talk about it
all the time that there may be
expenditures
that look wrong. They look wrong, right?
Like we're seven months into the year,
but we've only spent
25% of the budgeted amount. Oh wow,
we're going to come in under budget. No,
we're not because there are four
payments a year and we just haven't
triggered the thing. We have that all
the time.
>> I I know that it would be tricky for us
to go through the whole set of
>> for the most part. You don't have the
degree of um variance of when things are
paid. So, for example, if I were to say
to you, Rob, in Thanksgiving, tell me
what percent of your salt budget is
spent, and you say zero. And I say,
you're gonna have a surplus.
>> Yeah, it's meaningless.
>> No, because December, January, and
February, that's an easy one.
>> That's meaningless. Yes, we know that,
>> right? Of the majority of our
expenditures that are seasonal would
require us to sit here for another four
hours and go over why that's not an
accurate number. And that's why school
districts don't do it is because, like I
said, we have five pay periods that
happen from June 15th to June 30th
because they get their balloon checks.
We have $400,000
in salary that's distributed during the
uh end of June. So, we should be, you
know, behind the eightball um in terms
of uh the percentages. So, like I said,
I'm very happy to take June's and send
that to you guys so that you can see
where we ended the year. That's that's
absolutely something that would help Kim
out, but it's not accurate for us to
even look at the what we've spent to
date this year and try to make gobble
goo out of it. It's it's not accurate
>> when you do it on when you talk about it
at your meetings at the at the sorry,
not your the board of ed meetings.
>> Yeah.
>> Um monthly. Do you talk about it in
those terms? like in terms of okay so if
somebody looked at your
>> I forget what your last meeting was the
end of January
>> somebody looked
>> they might not have discussed it in
January it's as it comes up so if
somebody had a question on the
financials if Caitlyn says this month
when she looks at Jod's financials hey
Jod why are we only at 45% spent and
we're halfway through the school year
for salaries Jod then would address the
question but a fair number of the board
of ed members because they see it every
month and they've been there for years.
That one's an easy one for them. They
know that. Um, why are we going to be
100% spent on a line item on the first
day of school for summer school? Because
ESY is already done. Why are we going to
be 100% on a line item for dues and
fees? Because dues and fees are due at a
certain time. So again, the audit should
be done soon. Um, but I will gladly take
again June's uh financial reports and
send those along to you guys. They're
online. It's easy. I can get that for
you.
Any other questions?
Well,
you know, it's a tough year. I I don't
have further questions myself. I think I
appreciate your presentation. I
appreciate you answering our questions.
Again, board members, if if anybody else
can think of anything, now is a great
time. Otherwise, we will maul we will
consider and you know, I'm sure we'll
have more to discuss at our meeting. I
know we're at the same time as you guys
uh as the board of ed our next meeting
overlaps with yours. Uh I'm sure we'll
discuss it some more then. For now, I'm
good. Unless anybody has anything
further for the board on the board?
Anybody? Anybody? Okay.
Now, if I can only Well, I can only
apparently open one PDF at once, which
is extremely irritating. This is an
older computer. Uh, but I don't believe
we have because this is a special
meeting. I don't think we have um
anything beyond budget discussion on
this agenda really. So, is there
anything else that anyone would like to
bring up that if we're done with the
school, we could let Val go u and we can
talk about anything else anybody has
thoughts on.
I have my own and you know, Lisa knows
this. I I've talked to her a couple
times. I keep trying to get at
because I'm worried about the capital
budget. I'm not worried about I'm I'm
worried about us being able to evaluate
the capital budget. I'm still attempting
to get a sense for what's in our capital
funds under the understanding the audit
isn't complete. Same exact constraints.
Um that's my big thing right now is
trying to figure out what we have in our
various town funds. We actually have
quite a few of them. If you look at our
audit, there are many funds. I'm trying
to get an arm around that. Um, beyond
that,
you know, I haven't seen, thanks to Lisa
for sending us a new spreadsheet. It's
not dramatically different than the last
one we got. I am not aware that the
board of selectman has had a chance to
meet this week. I know they need to make
some decisions. I don't know if anyone's
different.
Um,
beyond that, I I don't really know that
there's much for us to take action on
tonight. I think we have to digest this
and think about also, you know, think
about the fire budget as well that was
presented to us and we'll talk about it
next week. We have some other
presentations coming in, but I don't
have anything in particular I want to
take action on tonight. Does anyone have
other thoughts on the board?
Anybody? Anybody?
Anybody?
>> No.
>> A motion to to uh adjourn.
>> Yeah. I mean, I think that's where we're
at.
>> I think that's where we're at, Rob.
>> I think that's where we're at. I I just
want to be sure. I never want to shut
anything down. Um just FYI, like again,
we do have a couple of presentations
coming in next week. I I encourage
everybody to try to look at We got some
emails this afternoon. you may not have
all seen them uh from the town treasurer
to try to look at the stuff that's in
there.
And if there's you have questions,
things that arise, think about that for
our meeting on the 11th. That would be
helpful. Um I haven't even had a chance
to look at every one of those PDFs. So,
you know, I'm right there with you. Try
to do that. In the meantime, I will
continue to attempt to gather
information for the board from the town
side as best I can. But yes, if we would
like to entertain a motion to adjurnn,
I'm all ears.
>> I'll second that.
>> Motion. Okay.
>> All right. So, Bill makes the motion.
Louise seconds.
>> All in favor?
>> All in favor? Yay.
>> I I
>> I
>> That sounds like 70 to me. We don't have
seven. All right. All, thank you very
much. I'm going to figure out how to
turn off the recording and uh you know,
go from there. Have a have a good night,
everyone.
>> Thanks, Rob. Okay. Bye-bye.
>> Bye.